THE HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY 
AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 1996: 

A SUMMARY OF REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 

1 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I. What is HIPAA?........................................................................................8 

I. Administrative Simplification...................................................................8 

I. Who Must Comply with HIPAA? ............................................................8 

A. A health plan 
B. A health care clearinghouse 
C. A health care provider who transmits any health information in electronic 

form in connection with a covered transaction. 

IV. Covered Transactions................................................................................9 

A. In General 
B. Business Associates 
C. Additional Requirements for Health Plans 
D. Compliance Date 

V. Privacy of Health Information..................................................................11 

A. General Requirements...................................................................11 
1. Use and Disclosure 

a. Permitted Uses and Disclosures of PHI 
b. Required Disclosures of PHI 

2. Minimum Necessary Rule 
3. Business Associates 

a. Exceptions 
b. Business Associate Contracts 

4. Deceased Individuals 
5. Personal Representatives 

a. Adults and Emancipated Minors 
b. Unemancipated Minors 
c. Deceased Individuals 
d. Abuse, Neglect and Endangerment Situations 

6. Whistleblowers and Crime Victims 

B. Uses and Disclosures : Organizational Requirements..................16 
1. Hybrid Entities 
2.         Requirements for Group Health Plans 
3.         Multiple Covered Functions 

C. Uses and Disclosures to Carry Out Treatment, Payment, or Health Care 
Operations......................................................................................18 

2 



D. Uses and Disclosures for which an Authorization is Required.....20 
1. General Rule 
2. Psychotherapy Notes 
3. Marketing 
4. Valid Authorizations 
5. Defective Authorizations 
6. Compound Authorizations 
7. Prohibition on Conditioning Authorizations 
8. Revocation of Authorizations 

E. Uses and Disclosures Requiring an Opportunity for the Individual to Agree 
or Object.........................................................................................23 
1. General Rule 
2. Opportunity to Restrict 
3. Emergency 
4. Family Members 

F. Uses and Disclosures for Which an Authorization or Opportunity to Agree or 
Object is not Required...................................................................25 
1.         Uses and Disclosures Required by Law 
2. Uses and Disclosures for Public Health Activities 
3. Disclosures about Victims of Abuse, Neglect or Domestic Violence 
4. Uses and Disclosures for Health Oversight Activities 
5. Disclosures for Judicial and Administrative Proceedings 

a. In General 
b. Satisfactory Assurances of Notice 
c. Satisfactory Assurances - Protective Order 
d. Qualified Protective Order 
e. Exception 

6. Disclosures for Law Enforcement Purposes 
a. Pursuant to Process 
b. Identification and Location Purposes 
c. Victims of a Crime 
d. Decedents 
e. Crime of Premises 
f. Reporting Crime in Emergencies. 

7. Uses and Disclosures about Decedents 
a. Coroners and Medical Examiners 
b. Funeral Directors 

8. Uses and Disclosures for Organ, Eye or Tissue Donation Purposes 
9. Uses and Disclosures for Research Purposes 

a. In General 
b. Documentation of Waiver: 

10. Uses and Disclosures to Avert a Serious Threat to Health or Safety 
a. Permitted Disclosures 

3 



b. Use or Disclosure not Permitted 
c. Limit on What May Be Disclosed 
d. Presumption of Good Faith 

11. Uses and Disclosures for Specialized Government Functions 
a. Armed Forces Personnel 
b. Separation or Discharge 
c. Veterans 
d. Foreign Military Personnel 
e. National Security and Intelligence 
f. Protective Services 
g. Medical Suitability Determinations 
h. Correctional Institutions and Law Enforcement Custody 
i. Government Programs Providing Benefits 

12. Disclosures for Workers’ Compensation 
            

G. Other Requirements Relating to Uses and Disclosures of PHI.....36 
1. De-Identification 
2. Minimum Necessary Requirements 

a. Uses of PHI 
b. Disclosures of PHI c. Requests for PHI 
d. Entire Record 

3. Limited Data Set 
a. Definition 
b. Permitted Purposes 
c. Data Use Agreement 

4. Fund raising 
a. In General 
b. Requirements 

5. Underwriting 
6. Verification Requirements 

a. General 
b. Conditions 
c. Identity of Public Officials 
d. Authority of Public Officials 
e. Good Faith 

H. Notice of Privacy Practices for PHI................................................42 
1. General 
2. Exception for Group Health Plans 
3. Content of Notice 

a. Header 
b. Uses and Disclosures 
c. Special Uses and Disclosures 
d. Individual Rights 
e. Covered Entity’s Duties 
f. Complaints 

4 



g. Contact 
h. Effective Date 
i. Revisions 

4. Provision of Notice 
a. Health Plans 
b. Certain Health Care Providers 
c. Electronic Notice 
d. Joint Notice by Separate Entities 
e. Documentation 

I. Rights to Request Privacy Protection for PHI..............................46 

1. Right of Individual to Request Restriction of Uses and Disclosures 
2. Confidential Communications Requirements 

J. Access of Individuals to PHI..........................................................47 
1. Access to PHI 

                                   a. Right of Access 
b. Unreviewable Grounds for Denial 
c. Reviewable Grounds for Denial 
d. Review of a Denial of Access 

2. Requests for Access and Timely Action 
a. Requests for Access 
b. Timely Action by the Covered Entity 

3.         Provision of Access 
a. Providing the Access Requested 
b. Form of Access Requested 
c. Time and Manner of Access 
d. Fees 

4. Denial of Access 
a. Making Information Accessible 

                                   b. Denial 
c. Other Responsibility 
d. Review of Denial Requested 

5. Documentation 

K. Amendment of PHI........................................................................51 

1. Right to Amend 
a. Right to Amend 
b. Denial of Amendment 

2. Requests for Amendment and Timely Action 
a. Request for Amendment 
b. Timely Action by the Covered Entity 

3. Accepting the Amendment 
a. Making the Amendment 

5 



b. Informing the Individual 
c. Informing Others 

4. Denying the Amendment 
a. Denial 
b. Statement of Disagreement 
c. Rebuttal Statement 
d. Recordkeeping 
e.         Future Disclosures 

5. Actions on Notices of Amendment 
6. Documentation 

L. Accounting of Disclosures of PHI..................................................53 

1. Right to an Accounting of Disclosures of PHI 
a. Right to an Accounting 
b. Suspension of Right to an Accounting 
c. Time Period 

2. Content of the Accounting 
3. Provision of the Accounting 
4. Documentation 

M. Administrative Requirements........................................................56 

1. Personnel Designations 
2. Training 
3. Safeguards 
4. Complaints to the Covered Entity 
5. Sanctions 
6. Mitigation 
7. Refraining from Intimidation or Retaliatory Acts 
8. Waiver of Rights 
9. Policies and Procedures 

a. General 
b. Changes to Policies and Procedures 
c. Changes in Law 
d. Changes to Privacy Practices Stated in the Notice 
e. Changes to Other Policies and Procedures 

10. Documentation 
11. Group Health Plans 

N. Transition Provisions.....................................................................60 

1. Effect of Prior Authorizations 
2. Effect of Prior Authorizations for Other than Research Purposes 
3. Effect of Prior Permission for Research 
4. Effect of Prior Contracts or Arrangements with Business Associates 

6 



5. Deemed Compliance 
a. Qualification 
b. Limited Deemed Compliance Period 
c. Covered Entity Responsibilities 

VI. Security Requirements..............................................................................62 

VII National Identifiers....................................................................................62 

VIII Preemption of State Law...........................................................................63 

IX Compliance and Enforcement...................................................................63 

X Penalties.....................................................................................................63 

A. General 
B.         Wrongful Disclosure 

7 



HIPAA: THE HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY 
AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 1996 

I. What is HIPAA? 

HIPAA is a federal law passed by Congress in 1996 for the purpose of improving the 
portability and continuity of health insurance coverage, to combat waste, fraud and abuse in 
health insurance and health care delivery, to simplify the administration of health insurance, and 
for other purposes. 

In order to achieve the goal of administrative simplification and to encourage the 
development of a health information system, HIPAA calls for the establishment of standards and 
requirements for the electronic transmission of certain health information. 

II. Administrative Simplification 

HIPAA requires the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to establish 
standards in the following areas: 

A. Transactions 
B. Unique Health Identifiers 
C. Security 
D. Privacy of Health Information 

III. Who Must Comply with HIPAA? 

The Standards adopted by DHHS apply to the following “covered entities:” 

F. A health plan 
G. A health care clearinghouse 
H. A health care provider who transmits any health information in electronic form in 

connection with a covered transaction. 

Health Plan means an individual or group plan that provides, or pays the cost of, medical 
care. A health plan includes a group health plan, defined as an employee welfare benefit plan 
(ERISA) that has 50 or more participants or is administered by an entity other than the employer 
that established and maintains the plan. 

Health Care Clearinghouse means a public or private entity, including a billing service, 
repricing company, community health management information system or community health 
information system, and “value-added” networks and switches, that does either of the following 
functions: 

1) processes or facilitates the processing of health information received from another 
entity in a nonstandard format or containing nonstandard data content into standard data 
elements or a standard transaction. 

8 



2) receives a standard transaction from another entity and processes or facilitates the 
processing of health information into nonstandard format or nonstandard data content for 
the receiving entity. 

Health Care Provider  means a provider of services, a provider of medical or health 
services, and any other person or organization who furnishes, bills, or is paid for health care in 
the normal course of business. 

Health Care means care, services, or supplies related to the health of an individual. It 
includes, but is not limited to: 

1) preventative, diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitative, maintenance, or palliative care, 
and counseling, service, assessment, or procedure with respect to the physical or mental 
condition, or functional status, of an individual or that affects the structure or function of 
the body; and 
2) Sale or dispensing of a drug, device, equipment, or other item in accordance with a 
prescription. 

IV Covered Transactions 

A. In General 

A Covered Transaction is the transmission of information between two parties to carry 
out financial or administrative activities related to health care. It includes the following types of 
information exchanges: 

1. Health care claims or equivalent encounter information 
2. Health care payment and remittance advice 
3. Coordination of Benefits 
4. Health care claim status 
5. Enrollment and disenrollment in a health plan 
6. Eligibility for a health plan 
7. Health plan premium payments 
8. Referral certification and authorization 
9. First report of injury 
10. Health claims attachments 
11. Other transactions which DHHS may prescribe by regulation. 

If a Covered Entity conducts with another Covered Entity (or within the same Covered 
Entity), using electronic media, a transaction for which DHHS has adopted a standard, the 
Covered Entity must conduct the transaction as a standard transaction. 

B. Business Associates 

If a Covered Entity chooses to use a Business Associate to conduct all or part of a 
transaction on behalf of the Covered Entity, the Covered Entity must require the Business 

9 



Associate to: 1) comply with all applicable transactions requirements and 2) require any agent or 
subcontractor to comply with all applicable transactions requirements. 

Business Associate means, with respect to a Covered Entity, a person who: 

(i) on behalf of such Covered Entity or an Organized Health Care Arrangement 
(“OHCA”), but other than in the capacity of a member of the workforce of such Covered 
Entity, performs, or assists in the performance of: 

(A) A function or activity involving the use or disclosure of individually 
identifiable health information, including claims processing or administration, 
data analysis, processing or administration, utilization review, quality assurance, 
billing, benefit management, practice management, and repricing; or 
(B) Any other function or activity regulated by HIPAA; or 

(ii) Provides, other than in the capacity of a member of the workforce of such Covered 
Entity, legal, actuarial, accounting, consulting, data aggregation, management, 
administrative, accreditation, or financial services to or for such Covered Entity or an 
OHCA, where the provision of the service involves the disclosure of individually 
identifiable health information from such Covered Entity or OHCA, or from another 
Business Associate of such Covered Entity or OHCA, to the person. 

A Covered Entity participating in an OHCA that performs a function, activity or service 
as described in (i) or (ii) above, does not because of that performance become a business 
associate of the other covered entities in the OHCA. 

A Covered Entity may be a Business Associate of another Covered Entity. 

When conducting a covered transaction, a Covered Entity must use the applicable 
medical data code sets as specified in the implementation specifications adopted by DHHS that 
are valid at the time the health care is furnished and the nonmedical data code sets as specified 
in the implementation specifications adopted by DHHS that are valid at the time the transaction 
is initiated. 

Code set means any set of codes used to encode data elements, such as tables of terms, 
medical concepts, medical diagnostic codes, or medical procedure codes. It includes the codes 
and descriptors of the codes. 

A Covered Entity may not enter into an trading partner agreement ( an agreement related 
to the exchange of information in electronic transactions between each party to the agreement) 
that would change the definition, data condition or data element or segment in a standard; add 
any data elements or segments to the maximum defined data set; use any code or data elements 
that are either marked “not used” in the standard’s implementation specification or are not in the 
standard’s implementation specification(s); or change the meaning or intent of the standard’s 
implementation specification(s). 

C. Additional Requirements for Health Plans 

10 



6. If an entity requests a health plan to conduct a transaction as a standard 
transaction, the health plan must do so. 

7. A health plan may not reject a transaction, or attempt to adversely affect 
the other entity or transaction because it is a standard transaction. 

8. A health plan may not reject a standard transaction on the basis that it 
contains data elements not needed or used by the health plan. 

9. A health plan may not offer an incentive to a health care provider to 
conduct a transaction as a direct data entry transaction. 

10. A health plan that operates as a health care clearinghouse, or requires an 
entity to use a health care clearinghouse to receive, process, or transmit a standard 
transaction may not charge fees or costs in excess of the fees or costs for normal 
telecommunications that the entity incurs. 

11. If a health plan receives a standard transaction and coordinates benefits 
with another health plan or payer, it must store the coordination of benefits data it 
needs to forward the standard transaction to the other health plan or payer. 

12. A health plan must accept and promptly process any standard transaction 
that contains codes that are valid. 

13. A health plan must keep code sets for the current billing period and 
appeals periods still open to processing under the terms of the health plan’s 
coverage. 

D. Compliance Date 

The Compliance Date for the Transaction Standards is October 16, 2002. However, 
recently passed legislation allows covered entities to apply for an extension of this deadline to 
delay compliance until October 16, 2003. The University applied for this extension. 

V. Privacy of Health Information 

A. General Requirements 

The privacy regulations under HIPAA apply to covered entities who transmit health 
information in electronic form in connection with a covered transaction. 

1. Use and Disclosure 

A Covered Entity may not use or disclose protected health information except as 
permitted or required under HIPAA. 

Health information means any information, whether oral or recorded in any form or 
medium, that: 

1) Is created or received by a health care provider, health plan, public health authority, 
employer, life insurer, school or university, or health care clearinghouse; and 
2) Relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental health or condition of an 

11 



individual; the provision of health care to an individual; or the past, present, or future 
payment for the provision of health care to an individual. 

          Individually identifiable health information means information that is a subset of health 
information, including demographic information collected from an individual, and: 

1) Is created or received by a health care provider, health plan, employer, or health care 
clearinghouse; and 
2) Relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental health or condition of an 
individual; the provision of health care to an individual; or the past, present, or future 
payment for the provision of health care to an individual; and 

(i) That identifies the individual; or 
(ii) With respect to which there is a reasonable basis to believe the information 
can be used to identify the individual. 

Protected health information (“PHI”) means individually identifiable health 
information: 

1) Except as provided in (2) of this definition, that is: 
(i) transmitted by electronic media; 

(ii) maintained in any medium described in the definition of electronic media; or 

(iii) transmitted or maintained in any other form or medium 

2) PHI excludes individually identifiable health information in: 

(i) Education records covered by FERPA; and 

(ii) Records on a student who is eighteen years of age or older, or is attending an 
institution of postsecondary education, which are made or maintained by a 
physician, psychiatrist, psychologist, or other recognized professional or 
paraprofessional acting in his professional or paraprofessional capacity, or 
assisting in that capacity, and which are made, maintained, or used only in 
connection with the provision of treatment to the student, and are not available to 
anyone other than persons providing such treatment, except that such records can 
be personally reviewed by a physician or other appropriate professional of the 
student’s choice. 

(iii) Employment records held by a covered entity in its role as employer. 

Electronic Media means the mode of electronic transmission, including the Internet, 
Extranet, leased lines, dial-up lines, private networks, and those transmissions that are physically 
moved from one location to another using magnetic tape, disk or compact disk media. 

a. Permitted Uses and Disclosures of PHI 

12 



i. To the individual; 
ii. For treatment, payment or health care operations as permitted by the 
regulations; 
iii. Pursuant to and in compliance with an Authorization 
iv. Pursuant to an agreement or in an emergency 
v. Other uses as permitted by the regulations 
vi. Incident to a use or disclosure otherwise permitted or required by the 
regulations 

b. Required Disclosures of PHI 
i. To the individual when requested 
ii. When required by the Secretary of DHHS for compliance purposes 

2. Minimum Necessary Rule 

When using or disclosing PHI or when requesting PHI from another Covered Entity, a 
Covered Entity must make reasonable efforts to limit protected health information to the 
minimum necessary to accomplish the intended purpose of the use, disclosure or request. 

This rule does not apply to: 

a. Disclosures to or requests by a health care provider for treatment; 
b. Uses or disclosures made to the individual; 
c. Uses or disclosures made pursuant to an authorization; 
d. Disclosures made to the Secretary for compliance and enforcement; 
e. Uses or disclosures required by law; and 
f. Uses and disclosures that are required for compliance with HIPAA 

requirements 

2. Business Associates 

A Covered Entity may disclose PHI to a Business Associate and may allow a Business 
Associate to create or receive PHI on its behalf, if the Covered Entity obtains satisfactory 
assurance that the Business Associate will appropriately safeguard the information. Examples of 
a Business Associate include billing companies, computer vendors, accrediting organizations, 
administrative service providers, accountants, attorneys, auditors, consultants and document 
storage or destruction companies. 

b. Exceptions 

This standard does not apply: 

i. With respect to disclosures by a Covered Entity to a health care provider 
concerning treatment; 
ii. With respect to disclosures by a group health plan, a health insurance 

13 



issuer or HMO with respect to a group health plan to the plan sponsor if 
the requirements of 164.504(f) are met; or 
iii. With respect to uses or disclosures by a health plan that is a 
government program providing public benefits. 

b. Business Associate Contracts 

The contract between the Covered Entity and the Business Associate must 
establish the permitted and required uses and disclosures of such 
information by the Business Associate. The contract may not authorize the 
Business Associate to use or further disclose the information in a manner 
that would violate HIPAA if done by the Covered Entity, except that the 
contract may permit the Business Associate to use and disclose PHI for its 
own management and administration, and may permit the Business 
Associate to provide data aggregation services relating to the health care 
operations of the Covered Entity. 

The DHHS has provided sample business associate contract language in 
an appendix to the regulations to assist Covered Entities in complying 
with the requirements. 

4. Deceased Individuals 

A Covered Entity must comply with the requirements of the privacy regulations with 
respect to the PHI of a deceased individual. 

4. Personal Representatives 

Except as otherwise provided, a Covered Entity must treat a personal representative as 
the individual for purposes of privacy of PHI. 

b. Adults and Emancipated Minors 

If under applicable law, a person has the authority to act on behalf of an 
adult or emancipated minor in making decisions related to health care, a 
Covered Entity must treat the person as a personal representative with 
respect to PHI relevant to such personal representation. 

b. Unemancipated Minors 

If under applicable law, a parent, guardian or other person acting in loco 
parentis has the authority to act on behalf of an unemancipated minor in 
making decisions related to health care, a Covered Entity must treat the 
person as a personal representative with respect to PHI relevant to such 
personal representation, except that such person may not be a personal 
representative and the minor has the authority to act as an individual with 

14 



respect to PHI if: 
i. The minor consents to such health care service, no other consent is 

required by law, and the minor has not requested such person be 
treated as the personal representative; 

ii. The minor may lawfully obtain such health care service without 
the consent of a parent, guardian or other person acting in loco 
parentis and the minor, a court or another person authorized by law 
consents to such health care service; or 

iii. A parent, guardian or other person acting in loco parentis agrees to 
confidentiality between a covered health care provider and the 
minor. 

Notwithstanding the above provisions, if applicable state or other law 
permits or requires disclosure of PHI of an unemancipated minor to a 
parent, guardian or other person acting in loco parentis, a Covered Entity 
may disclose the PHI; if applicable state or other law prohibits disclosure 
of PHI of an unemancipated minor to a parent, guardian or other person 
acting in loco parentis, a Covered Entity may not disclose the PHI; and 
where the parent, guardian or other person acting in loco parentis is not the 
personal representative under the above provisions and there is no 
applicable access provision under state or other law, a Covered Entity may 
provide or deny access to PHI to a parent, guardian or other person acting 
in loco parentis if such action is consistent with state or other applicable 
law and the decision is made by a licensed health care professional. 

 

b. Deceased Individuals 

If under applicable law, an executor, administrator, or other person has 
the authority to act on behalf of a deceased individual or of the 
individual’s estate, a Covered Entity must treat the person as a personal 
representative with respect to PHI relevant to such personal representation. 

b. Abuse, Neglect and Endangerment Situations 

Notwithstanding any state law or any HIPAA requirement to the contrary, 
a Covered Entity may elect not to treat a person as the personal 
representative of an individual if: 

i. The individual has been or may be subjected to domestic violence, 
abuse or neglect by such person; or 

ii. Treating such person as the personal representative could endanger 

15 



the individual; and 

iii. The Covered Entity decides, in the exercise of professional 
judgment, that it is not in the individual’s best interest to treat the 
person as the personal representative. 

6. Whistleblowers and Crime Victims 

A Covered Entity is not considered to have violated the requirements of the Privacy 
regulations if a member of its workforce or a Business Associate discloses PHI because of a 
reasonable belief that the Covered Entity engaged in unlawful or unprofessional conduct or 
provided care that endangers one or more patients, workers or the public, and the disclosure is to 
a health oversight agency, an authorized public health authority, an appropriate health care 
accreditation organization, or an attorney retained by the employee or Business Associate to 
determine their legal options. 

A Covered Entity is not considered to have violated the requirements of the Privacy 
regulations if a member of its workforce who is a victim of a criminal act discloses PHI to a law 
enforcement official if the PHI disclosed is about the suspected perpetrator of the criminal act 
and the PHI disclosed is limited to certain information specified in the regulations. 

B. Uses and Disclosures : Organizational Requirements 

1. Hybrid Entities 

If a Covered Entity is a Hybrid Entity, the requirements of the Privacy regulations, other 
than these Organizational Requirements, apply only to the Health Care Component(s) of the 
Hybrid Entity. 

Hybrid Entity means a single legal entity that is a Covered Entity whose business 
activities include both covered and non-covered functions and who designates health care 
components in accordance with the regulations. The University of Maine System is a Hybrid 
Entity. 

Health Care Component means: A component or combination of components of a 
Hybrid Entity designated and documented by the Hybrid Entity. The Health Care Component 
must include any component that would meet the definition of Covered Entity if it were a 
separate legal entity. The Health Care Component may also include a component only to the 
extent it performs:

 (1) Covered functions; or
 (2) Activities that would make such component a business associate of a component that 
performs covered functions if the two components were separate legal entities. 

The Covered Entity that is a Hybrid Entity must ensure that the Health Care Component 
of the entity complies with the Privacy regulations. The Hybrid Entity must ensure that: 

16 



a. Its health care component does not disclose PHI to another 
component of the Covered Entity in circumstances which would be 
prohibited by the Privacy regulations if the health care component and the 
other component were distinct legal entities. 

b. A component that performs activities that would make such 
component a business associate of a component that performs covered 
functions if the two components were separate legal entities does not use 
or disclose PHI it creates or receives from or on behalf of the health care 
component in a way prohibited by the Privacy regulations. 

c. If a member of the workforce performs duties for the health 
care component and another component of the entity, such person must 
not use or disclose PHI created or received in the course of or incident to 
the person’s work for the health care component in a way prohibited by 
the Privacy regulations. 

d. It complies with the Privacy regulations. 
e. Policies and procedures ensuring compliance with the 

Privacy regulations are implemented. 
f. The components that are part of the health care component are designated 

and that such designation is documented as required. 

2. Requirements for Group Health Plans 

Except as provided in the second and third paragraphs below or otherwise authorized by 
the individual, a group health plan may not disclose PHI to the plan sponsor or provide for or 
permit the disclosure of PHI to the plan sponsor by a health insurance issuer or HMO with 
respect to the group health plan unless the plan documents restrict the uses and disclosures of 
such information by the plan sponsor consistent with the requirements of the Privacy regulations. 

The group health plan, or a health insurance issuer or HMO with respect to the group 
health plan, may disclose summary health information to the plan sponsor, if the plan sponsor 
requests the summary health information for the purposes of 1) obtaining premium bids from 
health plans for providing health insurance coverage under the group health plan; or 2) 
modifying, amending, or terminating the group health plan. 

The group health plan, or a health insurance issuer or HMO with respect to the group 
health plan, may disclose to the plan sponsor information on whether an individual is 
participating in the group health plan, or is enrolled in or has disenrolled from a health insurance 
issuer or HMO offered by the plan. 

Plan documents must be amended to incorporate provisions which establish the permitted 
uses and disclosures of such information by the plan sponsor, must provide that the group health 
plan will disclose PHI to the plan sponsor only upon receipt of a certification from the plan 
sponsor that the plan documents have been amended to incorporate the provisions required by 
the Privacy regulations, and must provide for adequate separation between the group health plan 
and the plan sponsor. 

17 



A group health plan may not disclose PHI to the plan sponsor for the purpose of 
employment-related actions or decisions or in connection with any other benefit or 
employee benefit plan of the plan sponsor. 

2. Multiple Covered Functions 

A Covered Entity that performs multiple covered functions that would make the entity 
any combination of a health plan, a covered health care provider, and a health care 
clearinghouse, must comply with the Privacy regulations as applicable to the health plan, health 
care provider, or health care clearinghouse covered functions performed. 

A Covered Entity that performs multiple covered functions may use or disclose PHI of 
individuals who receive the Covered Entity’s health plan or health care provider services, but not 
both, only for the purposes related to the appropriate function being performed. 

C. Uses and Disclosures to Carry Out Treatment, Payment, or Health 
Care Operations 

Except for uses or disclosures of psychotherapy notes and uses or disclosures for 
marketing purposes, a Covered Entity may use or disclose PHI for treatment, payment or health 
care operations, provided such use or disclosure is consistent with other applicable requirements 
of the Privacy regulations, as follows: 

1. A Covered Entity may use or disclose PHI for its own treatment, payment 
or health care operations. 

2. A Covered Entity may disclose PHI for treatment activities of a health 
care provider. 

3. A Covered Entity may disclose PHI to another Covered Entity or a health 
care provider for the payment activities of the entity that receives the information. 

4. A Covered Entity may disclose PHI to another Covered Entity for health 
care operations activities of the entity that receives the information, if each entity 
either has or had a relationship with the individual who is the subject of the PHI 
being requested, the PHI pertains to such relationship, and the disclosure is for the 
purpose of conducting quality assessment and improvement activities, reviewing 
the competence or qualifications of health care professionals, evaluating provider 
performance and conducting training programs, or health care fraud and abuse 
detection or compliance. 

2. A Covered Entity that is in an OHCA may disclose PHI to another 
Covered Entity in the OHCA for any health care operations activities of the 
OHCA. 

Treatment means the provision, coordination or management of health care and related 
services by one or more health care providers, including coordination or management of health 
care by a health care provider with a third party, consultation between health care providers and 
referral of a patient for health care from one health care provider to another. 

18 



Payment means the activities undertaken by a health plan to obtain premiums or to 
determine or fulfill its responsibility for coverage and provision of benefits under the health plan 
or the activities undertaken by a health care provider or health plan to obtain or provide 
reimbursement for the provision of health care. 

Health Care Operations means any of the following activities of the Covered Entity to 
the extent the activities are related to covered functions: 

1. Conducting quality assessment and improvement activities 
2. Reviewing the competence or qualifications of health care professionals, 

evaluating provider performance and conducting training programs 
3. Underwriting, premium rating, and other activities relating to the creation, 

renewal or replacement of a contract of health insurance 
4. Conducting or arranging for medical review, legal services and auditing 

functions 
5. Business planning and development 
6. Business management and general administrative duties of the entity 

Covered Functions means those functions of a Covered Entity the performance of which 
makes the entity a health plan, health care provider or health care clearinghouse. 

D. Uses and Disclosures for which an Authorization is Required 

1. General Rule 

Except as otherwise permitted by the Privacy regulations, a Covered Entity may not use 
or disclose PHI without a valid authorization. 

1. Psychotherapy Notes 

Notwithstanding any other provision of the Privacy Regulations, except for the transition 
provisions, a Covered Entity must obtain an authorization for any use or disclosure of 
psychotherapy notes, except for: 

a.. Use by the originator of the psychotherapy notes for treatment; 
b. Use or disclosure by the Covered Entity for its own training 

programs in which students, trainees or practitioners in mental health learn 
under supervision to practice or improve their skills in counseling; 

c. Use or disclosure by the Covered Entity to defend itself in a 
legal action or other proceeding brought by the individual; or 

d. A Use or disclosure that is required by the DHHS, required 
by law, required by court order with respect to the oversight of the 
originator of the psychotherapy notes, is permitted to a coroner or medical 
examiner to identify a deceased person or cause of death, or as is 
necessary to avert a serious and imminent threat to the health or safety of a 

19 



person or the public. 

3. Marketing 

Notwithstanding any other provision of the Privacy Regulations, except for the transition 
provisions, a Covered Entity must obtain an authorization for any use or disclosure of PHI for 
marketing, except if the communication is in the form of: 

b. A face-to-face communication made by a Covered Entity to an 
individual; or 

c. A promotional gift of nominal value provided by the Covered 
Entity. 

If the marketing involves direct or indirect remuneration to the Covered Entity from a 
third party, the authorization must state that such remuneration is involved. 

3. Valid Authorizations 

A valid authorization must contain the following elements: 

b. A specific and meaningful description of the information to be 
used or disclosed; 

c. The name or other specific identification of the person(s) 
authorized to make the requested use or disclosure; 

d. The name or other specific identification of the person(s) to whom 
the Covered Entity may make the requested use or disclosure; 

e. A description of each purpose of the requested use or disclosure; 
f. An expiration date or event that relates to the individual or the 

purpose of the use or disclosure. The statement “end of research study,” 
“none,” or similar language is sufficient if the authorization is for a use or 
disclosure of PHI for research; 

g. Signature of the individual and date. If signed by a personal 
representative, a description of such representative’s authority to act must 
be included; 

h. Notice of the individual’s right to revoke the authorization in 
writing, the exceptions to the right to revoke and a description of how to 
revoke the authorization. If this information is already provided in the 
Covered Entity’s notice given to all individuals, a reference to that notice 
will meet this requirement. 

i. Notice of the ability or inability to condition treatment, payment, 
enrollment or eligibility for benefits on the authorization; and 

j. Notice of the potential for information disclosed to be redisclosed 
by the recipient and no longer protected by the Privacy regulations. 

An authorization may contain other elements which are not inconsistent with the 

20 



required elements. A valid authorization must be written in plain language. 

If a Covered Entity seeks an authorization from an individual for use or disclosure of 
PHI, the Covered Entity must provide the individual with a copy of the signed authorization. 

3. Defective Authorizations 

An authorization is not valid if it has any of the following defects: 

b. The expiration date has passed or the expiration event is known by 
the Covered Entity to have occurred; 

c. The authorization has not been filled out completely with respect 
to a required element, if applicable; 

d. The authorization is known by the Covered Entity to have been 
revoked; 

e. The authorization is a prohibited compound or conditioned 
authorization; 

f. Any material information in the authorization is known by the 
Covered Entity to be false. 

3. Compound Authorizations 

An authorization for use or disclosure of PHI may not be combined with any other 
document to create a compound authorization, except as follows: 

b. An authorization for the use or disclosure of PHI for a research 
study may be combined with any other type of written permission for the 
same research study, including another authorization for the use or 
disclosure of PHI for such research or a consent to participate in such 
research. 

c. An authorization for the use or disclosure of psychotherapy notes 
may only be combined with another authorization for the use or disclosure 
of psychotherapy notes. 

d. An authorization, other than an authorization for the use or 
disclosure of psychotherapy notes, may be combined with any other such 
authorization, except where the Covered Entity has conditioned the 
provision of treatment, payment, enrollment in the health plan, or 
eligibility for benefits on the provision of one of the authorizations. 

3. Prohibition on Conditioning Authorizations 

A Covered Entity may not condition the provision to an individual of treatment, payment, 
enrollment in the health plan, or eligibility for benefits on the provision of an authorization, 
except: 

b. A Covered health care provider may condition the provision of 

21 



research-related treatment on the provision of an authorization for the use 
or disclosure of PHI for such research; 

c. A health plan may condition enrollment in the health plan or 
eligibility for benefits on the provision of an authorization requested by 
the health plan prior to enrollment, if the authorization is sought for the 
health plan’s eligibility or enrollment determinations relating to the 
individual or for its underwriting or risk rating determinations and the 
authorization is not for a use or disclosure of psychotherapy notes. 

d. A Covered Entity may condition the provision of health care that is 
solely for the purpose of creating PHI for disclosure to a third party on the 
provision of an authorization for the disclosure of the PHI to such third 
party. 

3. Revocation of Authorizations 

An individual may revoke an authorization at any time, provided that the revocation is in 
writing, except to the extent that: 

b. The Covered Entity has taken action in reliance thereon; or 
c. If the authorization was obtained as a condition of obtaining 

insurance coverage, other law provides the insurer with the right to contest 
a claim under the policy or the policy itself. 

E. Uses and Disclosures Requiring an Opportunity for the Individual to 
Agree or Object 

4. General Rule 

A Covered Entity may use or disclose PHI provided that the individual is informed in 
advance of the use or disclosure and has the opportunity to agree to or prohibit or restrict the 
disclosure as described below. The Covered Entity may orally inform the individual of and 
obtain the individual’s oral agreement or objection to a use or disclosure permitted by this 
section. 

a. Except when an objection is expressed, a Covered Entity may: 

i. Use the individual’s name, place within the facility, the 
individual’s condition described in general terms, and the 
individual’s religious affiliation to maintain a directory of 
individuals in its facility; and 

ii. Disclose for directory purposes such information to members of 
the clergy or, except for religious affiliation, to other persons who 
ask for the individual by name. 

22 



4. Opportunity to Restrict 

A covered health care provider must inform an individual of the PHI that it may include 
in a directory and the persons to whom it may be disclosed and provide the individual with the 
opportunity to restrict or prohibit some or all of the uses or disclosures. 

4. Emergency 

If the opportunity to object to uses or disclosures permitted by this section cannot be 
provided because of the individual’s incapacity or an emergency treatment circumstance, a 
covered health care provider may use or disclose PHI for the facility’s directory if such 
disclosure is: 

b. Consistent with a prior expressed preference of the individual, if 
any, that is known to the covered health care provider; and 

c. In the individual’s best interest s determined by the covered health 
care provider, in the exercise of professional judgment. 

The covered health care provider must inform the individual and provide an opportunity 
to object to uses or disclosures for directory purposes when it becomes practicable to do so. 

4. Family Members 

A Covered Entity may, in accordance with paragraphs (a) or (b) below, disclose to a 
family member, other relative or close personal friend of the individual, or any other person 
identified by the individual, the PHI directly relevant to such person’s involvement with the 
individual’s care or payment for that care. 

A Covered Entity may, in accordance with paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) below, disclose PHI 
to notify or assist in notifying a family member, personal representative or other person 
responsible for the care of the individual of the individual’s location, general condition or death. 

b. If the individual is present or otherwise available prior to the use or 
disclosure permitted above and has the capacity to make health care 
decisions, the Covered Entity may use or disclose the PHI if it obtain’s the 
individual’s agreement, it provides the individual with the opportunity to 
object and the individual does not express an objection, or it reasonably 
infers from the circumstances that the individual does not object. 

b. If the individual is not present or the opportunity to object cannot 
practicably be provided because of incapacity or emergency, the Covered 
Entity may disclose only the PHI directly relevant to such person’s 
involvement with the individual’s care if the Covered Entity has 
determined that the disclosure is in the individual’s best interest. A 
Covered Entity may use its professional experience and common practice 
to make reasonable inferences of the individual’s best interest in allowing 
a person to act on behalf of the individual to pick up filled prescriptions, 

23 



medical supplies, X-rays and other similar forms of PHI. 

b. A Covered Entity may use or disclose PHI to a public or private entity 
authorized by law or by its charter to assist in disaster relief efforts for the 
purpose of coordinating with such entities uses or disclosures of PHI to 
notify or assist in notifying a family member, personal representative or 
other person responsible for the care of the individual of the individual’s 
location, general condition or death. The requirements of (a) and (b) apply 
to such uses and disclosures to the extent the Covered Entity determines 
they do not interfere with the ability to respond to the emergency 
circumstances. 

B. Uses and Disclosures for Which an Authorization or Opportunity to 
Agree or Object is not Required 

A Covered Entity may use or disclose PHI without the written authorization of the 
individual or the opportunity for the individual to agree or object in the situations described 
below. When the Covered Entity is required to inform the individual of, or the individual may 
agree to, a use or disclosure permitted below, the Covered Entity’s information and the 
individual’s agreement may be given orally. 

1. Uses and Disclosures Required by Law 

b. A Covered Entity may use or disclose PHI to the extent that such 
use or disclosure is required by law and the use or disclosure complies 
with and is limited to the relevant requirements of such law. 

c. A Covered Entity must meet the requirements described in sections 
3, 5 or 6 below for uses or disclosures required by law. 

1. Uses and Disclosures for Public Health Activities 

A Covered Entity may disclose PHI for the public health activities and purposes 
described below to: 

b. A public health authority that is authorized by law to collect or 
receive such information for the purpose of preventing or controlling 
disease, injury or disability; or at the direction of a public health authority 
to a foreign government agency that is acting in collaboration with a 
public health authority. 

c. A public health authority or other appropriate government 
authority authorized by law to receive reports of child abuse or neglect; 

d. A person subject to the jurisdiction of the FDA with respect to an 
FDA-regulated product or activity, for the purpose of activities related to 
the quality, safety or effectiveness of such FDA-regulated product or 
activity, such as collecting or reporting adverse events, product defects or 
problems; to track FDA-regulated products; to enable product recalls, 
repairs, replacements or lookback; or to conduct post-marketing 

24 



surveillance. 
e. A person who may have been exposed to a communicable disease 

or may be at risk of contracting or spreading a disease or condition, if the 
Covered Entity or public health authority is authorized by law to notify 
such person; 

f. An employer, about an individual who is member of the workforce 
of the employer, if: 

vi. The Covered Entity is a covered health care provider who 
is a member of the workforce of the employer or who provides 
healthcare at the request of the employer to conduct an evaluation 
relating to medical surveillance of the workplace or to evaluate 
whether the individual has a work-related illness or injury. 

ii The PHI that is disclosed consists of 
findings concerning a work-related illness or injury or workplace-
related medical surveillance. 

ii iThe employer needs such findings to 
comply with its obligations under certain federal or state laws to 
record such illness or injury or to carry out responsibilities for 
workplace medical surveillance. 

iv The covered health care provider gives written notice to the 
individual that PHI relating to medical surveillance of the 
workplace and work-related illnesses and injuries is disclosed to 
the employer by giving a copy of the notice to the individual when 
care is provided or, if care is provided at the site of the employer, 
by posting the notice in a prominent area where care is provided. 

If the Covered Entity is also a public health authority, the Covered Entity is permitted to 
use PHI in all cases in which it is permitted to disclose PHI for public health activities as listed 
above. 

3. Disclosures about Victims of Abuse, Neglect or Domestic Violence 

Except for reports of child abuse or neglect permitted by paragraph 2(b) above, a 
Covered Entity may disclose PHI about an individual whom it reasonably believes to be a victim 
of abuse, neglect, or domestic violence to a government authority authorized by law to receive 
reports of such abuse, neglect, or domestic violence: 

b. To the extent the disclosure is required by law and 
complies with and is limited according to that law; 

c. If the individual agrees to the disclosure; or 
d. To the extent the disclosure is expressly authorized by 

statute or regulation and: 
vi. The Covered Entity believes the disclosure is 

necessary to prevent serious harm to the individuals or other 
potential victims; or 

25 



vii. If the individual is unable to agree due to incapacity 
and a law enforcement or other public official authorized to receive 
a report represents that the PHI to be disclosed is not intended to 
be used against the individual and an immediate enforcement 
activity depends on the disclosure and would be adversely affected 
by waiting. 

A Covered Entity that makes a disclosure permitted above must promptly inform the 
individual that such a report has been made unless informing the individual would place the 
individual at risk of serious harm or the Covered Entity would be informing a personal 
representative and reasonably believes that the personal representative is responsible for the 
abuse, neglect or injury. 

4. Uses and Disclosures for Health Oversight Activities 

A Covered Entity may disclose PHI to a health oversight agency for oversight activities 
authorized by law, including audits, investigations, inspections, licensure or disciplinary actions, 
civil, administrative or criminal actions or other activities necessary for oversight of: 

b. The health care system 
c. Government benefit programs for which health information is 

relevant to beneficiary eligibility 
d. Entities subject to government regulatory programs for which 

health information is necessary for determining compliance, or 
e. Entities subject to civil rights laws for which health information is 

necessary for determining compliance. 

A health oversight activity does not include an investigation or other activity in which the 
individual is the subject of the investigation or activity and such investigation or activity does not 
arise out of and is not directly related to the receipt of health care, a claim for public benefits 
related to health or qualification for or receipt of public benefits or services when a patient’s 
health is integral to the claim for public benefits or services. However, if the health oversight 
activity or investigation is in conjunction with an oversight activity or investigation related to a 
claim for public benefits not related to health, the joint activity is considered a health oversight 
activity. 

If a Covered Entity is also a health oversight agency, it may use PHI for health oversight 
activities as permitted by this section. 

4. Disclosures for Judicial and Administrative Proceedings 

a. In General - A Covered Entity may disclose PHI in the course of any 
judicial or administrative proceeding: 

i. In response to a court order; or 
ii. In response to a subpoena, discovery request or other lawful 

26 



process that is not accompanied by an order of the court or 
administrative tribunal if: 
A. The Covered Entity receives satisfactory assurance as 

described below from the party seeking the PHI that 
reasonable efforts have been made to notify the individual 
of the request; or 

B. The Covered Entity receives satisfactory assurance as 
described below from the party seeking the PHI that 
reasonable efforts have been made to secure a qualified 
protective order as defined below. 

b. Satisfactory Assurances of Notice - Regarding item (a)(ii)(A) above, a 
Covered Entity receives satisfactory assurances from a party seeking PHI 
if the Covered Entity receives from such party a written statement and 
documentation that: 

i. The party has made a good faith attempt to provide written notice 
to the individual; 

ii. The notice included sufficient information about the litigation or 
proceeding in which the PHI is requested to permit the individual 
to raise an objection in the court or tribunal; and 

iii. The time for filing objections has lapsed and no objections were 
filed or all objections that were raised have been resolved by the 
court and disclosure is consistent with such resolution. 

c. Satisfactory Assurances - Protective Order - Regarding item (a)(ii)(B) 
above, a Covered Entity receives satisfactory assurances from a party 
seeking PHI if the Covered Entity receives from such party a written 
statement and documentation that: 

i. The parties to the dispute have agreed to a qualified protective 
order and have presented it to the court or tribunal; or 

ii. The party seeking the PHI has requested a qualified protective 
order from such court or tribunal. 

d. Qualified Protective Order - A qualified protective order means an order 
of a court or administrative tribunal or a stipulation by the parties to the 
litigation or administrative proceeding that: 

i. Prohibits the parties from using or disclosing the PHI for any 
purpose other than the litigation or proceeding for which it was 
requested; and 

ii. Requires the return to the Covered Entity or the destruction of the 
PHI at the end of the litigation or proceeding. 

e. Exception - Notwithstanding the above, a Covered Entity may disclose 
PHI in response to a subpoena, discovery request or other lawful process 

27 



that is not accompanied by an order of the court or administrative tribunal 
if the Covered Entity makes reasonable efforts to notify the individual of 
the request as specified above or the Covered Entity makes reasonable 
efforts to seek a qualified protective order as described above. 

The provisions of this section do not supersede other provisions of this part F that 
otherwise permit or restrict other uses or disclosures of PHI. 

6. Disclosures for Law Enforcement Purposes 

A Covered Entity may disclose PHI for a law enforcement purpose to a law enforcement 
official if the conditions in paragraphs (a) through (f) below are met, as applicable. 

a. Pursuant to Process - A Covered Entity may disclose PHI as required by 
law, including laws that require reporting of certain types of wounds or 
injuries, except for laws regarding abuse, neglect and domestic violence 
subject to sections 2 and 3 above; or in compliance with and limited by: 

i. A court order, warrant, subpoena or summons issued by a judge; 
ii. A grand jury subpoena; 
iii. An administrative request, subpoena, summons, a civil 

investigative demand, or similar process authorized by law, 
provided that the information sought is relevant and material to a 
legitimate law enforcement inquiry, the request is specific and 
limited in scope, and de-identified information could not 
reasonably be used. 

b. Identification and Location Purposes - Except for disclosures required by 
law as permitted by (a) above, a Covered Entity may disclose PHI to a law 
enforcement official for the purpose of identifying a suspect, fugitive, 
material witness or missing person, provided that it may disclose only the 
following information: name and address; date and place of birth; social 
security number; blood type; type of injury; date and time of treatment; 
date and time of death, if applicable; and a description of distinguishing 
characteristics. 

Except for the information listed above, a Covered Entity may not disclose 
for the purposes of identification or location any PHI related to an 
individual’s DNA, dental records, or typing, samples or analysis of body 
fluids or tissue. 

c. Victims of a Crime - Except for disclosures required by law as permitted 
by (a) above, a Covered Entity may disclose PHI to a law enforcement 
official about an individual who is suspected of being a victim of a crime, 
other than disclosures subject to sections 2 and 3 above, if the individual 
agrees to the disclosure, or the Covered Entity is unable to obtain the 

28 



individual’s agreement due to incapacity or emergency, provided that: 

i. The law enforcement official represents such PHI is needed to 
determine whether another person violated the law and such 
information is not intended to be used against the victim; 

ii. The law enforcement official represents that immediate law 
enforcement activity depends on the disclosure and would be 
materially and adversely affected by waiting; and 

iii. The Covered Entity determines the disclosure is in the best 
interests of the individual. 

d. Decedents - A Covered Entity may disclose PHI about a person who has 
died to a law enforcement official for the purpose of alerting law 
enforcement of the death if the Covered Entity has a suspicion that the 
death resulted from criminal conduct. 

e. Crime on Premises - A Covered Entity may disclose to a law enforcement 
official PHI that the Covered Entity believes in good faith constitutes 
evidence that a crime occurred on the premises of the Covered Entity. 

f. Reporting Crime in Emergencies - A covered health care provider 
providing emergency health care off the premises of the covered health 
care provider may disclose PHI to a law enforcement official if such 
disclosure appears necessary to alert law enforcement to the commission 
and nature of a crime, the location of such crime or victim of such crime, 
and the identity, description and location of the perpetrator of such crime. 
If a covered health care provider believes that such emergency is the result 
of abuse, neglect or domestic violence, this paragraph does not apply and 
the disclosure is subject to section 3 above. 

6. Uses and Disclosures about Decedents 

a. Coroners and Medical Examiners - A Covered Entity may disclose PHI to 
a coroner or medical examiner for the purpose of identifying a deceased 
person, determining a cause of death, or other duties as authorized by law. 
A Covered Entity that also performs the duties of a coroner or medical 
examiner may use PHI for these purposes. 

b. Funeral Directors - A Covered Entity may disclose PHI to funeral 
directors, consistent with applicable law, as necessary to carry out their 
duties with respect to the decedent. 

6. Uses and Disclosures for Organ, Eye or Tissue Donation Purposes 

A Covered Entity may use or disclose PHI to organ procurement organizations or other 

29 



entities engaged in procurement, banking or transplantation of organs, eyes or tissue for the 
purpose of facilitating donation and transplantation. 

6. Uses and Disclosures for Research Purposes 

a. In General - A Covered Entity may use or disclose PHI for research, 
regardless of the source of funding of the research, provided that: 

i. The Covered Entity obtains documentation that an alteration to or 
waiver, in whole or in part, of the individual authorization for use 
or disclosure of PHI has been approved by either: 

A. An IRB; or 
B. A privacy board that has members of varying backgrounds 

and appropriate professional competency to review the 
effect of the research; includes at least one member not 
affiliated with the Covered Entity, any sponsor of the 
research or any affiliate of either; and does not have any 
member participating who has a conflict of interest 

ii. The Covered Entity obtains from the researcher representations 
that: 

A. Use or disclosure is sought solely to review PHI a 
necessary to prepare a research protocol or for similar 
purposes preparatory to research; 

B. No PHI is to be removed from the Covered Entity; and 
C. The PHI is necessary for the research purposes. 

iii. The Covered Entity obtains from the researcher: 

A. Representation that the use or disclosure sought is solely 
for research on the PHI of decedents; 

B. Documentation at the request of the Covered Entity of the 
death of such individuals; and 

C. Representation that the PHI is necessary for the research 
purposes. 

b. Documentation of Waiver - For a use or disclosure to be permitted based 
upon documentation of approval of an alteration or waiver of 
authorization, the documentation must include all of the following: 

i. A statement identifying the IRB or privacy board and the date on 
which the alteration or waiver of authorization was approved; 

ii. A statement that the IRB or privacy board has determined that the 
alteration or waiver, in whole or in part, of authorization satisfies 

30 



the following criteria: 
A. The use or disclosure of PHI involved no more than a 

minimal risk to the privacy of individuals, based on , at 
least, the presence of the following elements: 
1. An adequate plan to protect the identifiers from 

improper use and disclosure; 
2. A adequate plan to destroy the identifiers at the 

earliest opportunity consistent with the conduct of 
the research, unless there is a health or research 
justification for retaining the identifiers or such 
retention is otherwise required by law; and 

3. Adequate written assurances that the PHI will not 
be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, 
except as required by law, for authorized oversight 
of the research study, or for other research for 
which the use or disclosure would be permitted by 
the regulations; 

B. The research could not practicably be conducted without 
the waiver or alteration; and 

C. The research could not practicably be conducted without 
access to and use of the PHI. 

 iii. A brief description of the PHI for which use or access has been 
determined to be necessary by the IRB or privacy board; 

iv. A statement that the alteration or waiver of authorization has been 
reviewed and approved under either normal or expedited review 
procedures as follows: 

A. An IRB must follow the requirements of the Common 
Rule; 

B. A privacy board must review the proposed research at 
convened meetings at which a majority of the board 
members are present, including one not affiliated with the 
Covered Entity, any sponsor of the research or any affiliate 
of either, and the alteration or waiver of authorization must 
be approved by a majority of the board present at the 
meeting, unless the board elects to use an expedited review 
procedure; 

C. A privacy board may use an expedited review procedure if 
the research involves no more than minimal risk to the 
privacy of the individuals who are the subject of the PHI. If 
the board elects to use an expedited review procedure, the 
review and approval of the alteration or waiver of 
authorization may be carried out by the chair of the board, 
or by one or more members as designated by the chair; and 

v. The documentation of the alteration or waiver of authorization 

31 



must be signed 
by the chair or 
other member, 
as designated 
by the chair, 
of the IRB or 
privacy board, 
as applicable. 

10. Uses and Disclosures to Avert a Serious Threat to Health or Safety 

a. Permitted Disclosures - A Covered Entity may, consistent with applicable 
law and ethical standards, use or disclose PHI, if the Covered Entity in 
good faith believes the use or disclosure: 

i. Is necessary to lessen a serious and imminent threat to the health or 
safety of a person or the public and is to a person or persons 
reasonably able to prevent or lessen the threat, including the target 
of the threat; 

ii. Is necessary for law enforcement authorities to identify or 
apprehend an individual who has admitted participating in a 
violent crime that may have caused serious physical harm to the 
victim or where it appears the individual has escaped from a 
correctional institution or lawful custody. 

b. Use or Disclosure not Permitted - A use or disclosure to law enforcement 
authorities to identify or apprehend an individual who has admitted 
participating in a violent crime that may have caused serious physical 
harm to the victim may not be made if the information is learned by the 
Covered Entity 

i. In the course of treatment to affect the propensity to commit the 
criminal conduct which is the basis for the disclosure, or 
counseling or therapy; or 

ii. Through a request by the individual to initiate or be referred for 
such treatment, counseling or therapy. 

c. Limit on What May Be Disclosed - A disclosure to law enforcement 
authorities to identify or apprehend an individual who has admitted 
participating in a violent crime that may have caused serious physical 
harm to the victim may only include the statement of admission and the 
PHI described in section 6(b) above. 

d. Presumption of Good Faith - A Covered Entity that uses or discloses PHI 
pursuant to paragraph (a) above is presumed to have acted in good faith 
with regard to a belief described in paragraph (a) above if the belief is 

32 



based on the Covered Entity’s actual knowledge or in reliance on a 
credible representation by a person with apparent knowledge or authority. 

11. Uses and Disclosures for Specialized Government Functions 

a. Armed Forces Personnel - A Covered Entity may use and disclose PHI of 
individuals who are Armed Forces personnel for activities deemed 
necessary by appropriate military command to assure proper execution of 
the military mission, if the appropriate military authority has published in 
the Federal Register the following information: 

i. Appropriate military command authorities; and 
ii. The purposes for which the PHI may be used or disclosed. 

b. Separation or Discharge - A Covered Entity that is a component of the 
Departments of Defense or Transportation may disclose to the Department 
of Veterans Affairs (DVA) the PHI of an individual who is a member of 
the Armed Forces upon the separation or discharge of the individual from 
military service for the purpose of determining eligibility for DVA 
benefits. 

c. Veterans - A Covered Entity that is a component of the Department of 
Veterans Affairs may use and disclose PHI to components of the 
Department that determine eligibility for or entitlement to, or that provide, 
DVA benefits. 

d. Foreign Military Personnel - A Covered Entity may use and disclose PHI 
of individuals who are foreign military personnel to their appropriate 
foreign military authority for the same purposes for which uses and 
disclosures are permitted for Armed Forces personnel under the notice 
published in the Federal Register under paragraph (a) above. 

e. National Security and Intelligence - A Covered Entity may disclose PHI to 
authorized federal officials for the conduct of lawful intelligence, counter-
intelligence and authorized national security activities. 

f. Protective Services - A Covered Entity may disclose PHI to authorized 
federal officials for the provision of protective services to the President or 
other persons authorized by law, or to foreign heads of state or other 
persons, or to conduct investigations authorized by 18 U.S.C. 871 and 879. 

g. Medical Suitability Determinations - A Covered Entity that is a 
component of the Department of State may use PHI to make medical 
suitability determinations and may disclose whether or not the individual 
was determined to be medically suitable to the officials in the Department 
of State who need access to such information for the following purposes: 

33 



i. For the purpose of a required security clearance; 
ii. As necessary to determine worldwide availability or availability 

for mandatory service abroad under the Foreign Service Act; or 
iii. For a family to accompany a Foreign Service member abroad 

consistent with the Foreign Service Act. 

h. Correctional Institutions and Law Enforcement Custody - A Covered 
Entity may disclose to a correctional institution or a law enforcement 
official having lawful custody of an individual PHI of that individual if the 
correctional institution or official represents that such PHI is necessary 
for: 

i. The provision of health care to the individual; 
ii. The health and safety of such individual or other inmates; 
iii. The health and safety of the officers or employees or others at the 

correctional institution; 
iv. The health and safety of such individuals and officers or others 

responsible for transporting or transferring inmates; 
v. Law enforcement on the premises of the correctional institution; 

and 
vi. The administration and maintenance of the safety, security and 

good order of the correctional institution. 

A Covered Entity that is a correctional institution may use PHI of inmates 
for any purpose for which such PHI may be disclosed. 

An individual is no longer an inmate when released on parole, probation, 
supervised release, or otherwise is no longer in lawful custody. 

i. Government Programs Providing Benefits - A health plan that is a 
government program providing public benefits may disclose PHI relating 
to eligibility for or enrollment in the health plan to another agency 
administering a government program providing public benefits if the 
sharing of such PHI in a data system is required or expressly authorized by 
statute or regulation. 
A Covered Entity that is a government agency administering a government 
program providing public benefits may disclose PHI relating to the 
program to another Covered Entity that is a government agency 
administering a government program providing public benefits if the 
programs serve the same or similar populations and the disclosure of PHI 
is necessary to coordinate covered functions or to improve administration 
of such programs. 

12. Disclosures for Workers’ Compensation 
            

A Covered Entity may disclose PHI as authorized by and to the extent necessary to 

34 



comply with laws relating to workers’ compensation or other similar programs, established by 
law, that provide benefits for work-related injuries or illness without regard to fault. 

G. Other Requirements Relating to Uses and Disclosures of PHI 

1. De-Identification 

Health Information which does not identify an individual and with respect to which there 
is no reasonable basis to believe the information can be used to identify an individual is not 
individually identifiable health information. A Covered Entity may determine that health 
information is not individually identifiable health information only if: 

a. A person with appropriate knowledge and experience, applying generally 
accepted statistical and scientific principles and methods, determines the 
risk is very small that the information could be used alone or in 
combination with reasonably available information by a recipient to 
identify the individual who is the subject of the information; and that 
person documents the methods and results of the analysis that justify such 
determination; or 

b. The following identifiers of the individual or of relatives, employers or 
household members of the individual, are removed: 

vi. Names; 
vii. All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, except for 

the initial three digits of a zip code in certain circumstances; 
viii. All elements of dates except year and all ages over 89; 
ix. Telephone numbers; 
x. Fax numbers; 
xi. Electronic mail addresses; 
xii. Social security numbers; 
xiii. Medical record numbers; 
xiv. Health plan beneficiary numbers; 
xv. Account numbers; 
xvi. Vehicle identifiers, serial and license plate numbers; 
xvii. Device identifiers and serial numbers; 
xviii. URL’s; 
xix. IP address numbers; 
xx. Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints; 
xxi. Full-face photographs and comparable images; and 
xxii. Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or 

code, except as permitted by paragraph (c) below. 
xviii. Certificate/license numbers; 

c. A Covered Entity may assign a code or other means of record 
identification to allow de-identified information to be re-identified by the 
Covered Entity, provided that: 

35 



i. The code or other means is not derived from or related to 
information about the individual and is not otherwise capable of 
being translated to identify the individual; and 

ii. The Covered Entity does not use or disclose the code or other 
means for any other purpose and does not disclose the mechanism 
for re-identification. 

2. Minimum Necessary Requirements 

A Covered Entity must meet the following requirements with respect to a request for, or 
the use and disclosure of PHI. 

a. Uses of PHI - A Covered Entity must: 

i. Identify the persons or classes of persons in its workforce who 
need access to PHI to carry out their duties; 

ii For each such person or classes of persons, 
identify the category or categories of PHI to which access is 
needed and any conditions appropriate to such access; and 

iii. Limit the access of such persons or classes identified in (i) to the 
PHI identified in (ii). 

b. Disclosures of PHI 

i. For routine and recurring disclosures, a 
Covered Entity must implement policies and procedures that limit 
the PHI disclosed to the amount reasonably necessary to achieve 
the purpose of the disclosure; 

ii. For all other disclosures, a Covered Entity 
must: 
A. Develop criteria designed to limit the PHI disclosed to the 

information reasonably necessary to accomplish the 
purpose of the disclosure; and 

B. Review requests for disclosure on an individual basis in 
accordance with such criteria. 

i. A Covered Entity may rely, if such reliance 
is reasonable, on a requested disclosure as the minimum necessary 
for the stated purpose when: 

A. Making permitted disclosures to public officials if the 
public official represents that the information requested is 
the minimum necessary; 

B. The information is requested by another Covered Entity; 
C. The information is requested by a professional who is a 

member of its workforce or a Business Associate for the 

36 



purpose of providing professional services to the Covered 
Entity and the professional represents that the information 
requested is the minimum necessary; or 

D. Documentation or representations complying with the 
requirements pertaining to research have been providing by 
a person requesting the information for research purposes. 

c. Requests for PHI 

vi. When requesting PHI from other Covered Entities, 
a Covered Entity must limit its request to that which is reasonably 
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the request is made. 

vii. For routine and recurring requests, a Covered Entity 
must implement policies and procedures that limit the PHI 
requested to the amount reasonably necessary to achieve the 
purpose for which the request is made. 

viii. For all other requests, a Covered Entity must: 
A. Develop criteria designed to limit the request for PHI to the 

information reasonably necessary to accomplish the 
purpose for which the request is made; and 

B. Review requests for disclosure on an individual basis in 
accordance with such criteria. 

d. Entire Record - For all uses, disclosures or requests to which the minimum 
necessary requirements apply, a Covered Entity may not use, disclose or 
request an entire medical record, except when the entire medical record is 
the amount reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose. 

3. Limited Data Set 

A Covered Entity may use or disclose a limited data set that meets the requirements of 
this section, if the Covered Entity enters into a data use agreement with the limited data set 
recipient. 

a. Definition - A limited Date set is PHI that excludes the following direct 
identifiers of the individual or of relatives, employers or household 
members of the individual: 

i. Names; 
ii Postal address information, other than town 

or city, State and zip code; 
iii. Telephone numbers; 
iv. Fax numbers; 
v. Electronic mail addresses; 
vi. Social security numbers; 
vii. Medical record numbers; 

37 



viii. Health plan beneficiary numbers; 
ix. Account numbers; 

x. Certificate/license numbers; 
xi. Vehicle identifiers, serial and license plate numbers; 
xii. Device identifiers and serial numbers; 
xiii. URL’s; 
xiv. IP address numbers; 
xv. Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints; and 
xvi. Full-face photographs and comparable images. 

b. Permitted Purposes 

i. A Covered entity may use or disclose a limited data set only for the 
purposes of research, public health, or health care operations. 

ii. A Covered Entity may use PHI to create a limited data set, or 
disclose PHI only to a business associate for such purpose, whether 
or not the limited data set is to be used by the Covered Entity. 

c. Data Use Agreement 

A Covered Entity may use or disclose a limited data set only if the 
Covered Entity obtains a data use agreement that meets the requirements 
of this section. A data use agreement between the Covered Entity and the 
limited data set recipient must: 

vi. Establish the permitted uses and disclosures 
of such information by the recipient. The agreement may not 
authorize the recipient to use or further disclose the information in 
a manner that would violate the requirements of the Privacy 
regulations if done by the Covered Entity; 

vii. Establish who is permitted to use or receive 
the limited data set; 

viii. Provide that the recipient will: 
A. Not use or further disclose the information other than as 

permitted by the agreement or required by law; 
B. Use appropriate safeguards to prevent use or disclosure of 

the information other than as provided for by the 
agreement; 

C. Report to the Covered Entity any use or disclosure of the 
information not provided for in the agreement of which it 
becomes aware; 

D. Ensure that any agents to whom it provides the limited data 
set agrees to the same restrictions and conditions as the 
recipient; and 

E. Not identify the information or contact the individuals. 

38 



A Covered Entity is not in compliance if it knew of a pattern of activity of 
the recipient that constituted a material breach or violation of the data use 
agreement, unless the Covered Entity took reasonable steps to cure the 
breach or end the violation and, if such steps were unsuccessful, 
discontinued disclosure of PHI to the recipient and reported the problem to 
the Secretary of DHHS. A Covered Entity that is a limited data set 
recipient and violates a data use agreement will be in violation of the 
requirements of this section. 

4. Fund raising 

a. In General - A Covered Entity may use, or disclose to a business associate 
or to an institutionally related foundation, the following PHI for the 
purposes of raising funds for its own benefit, without an authorization: 
i. Demographic information; and 
ii. Dates of health care provided to an individual. 

b. Requirements 
i. The Covered Entity may not use or disclose 

PHI for fund raising purposes unless a statement is included in the 
notice provided to individuals by the Covered Entity. 

ii. The Covered Entity must include in fund 
raising materials it sends to an individual a description of how the 
individual may opt out of receiving any further fund raising 
communications. 

iii. The Covered Entity must make reasonable 
efforts to ensure that individuals who opt out are not sent such 
communications. 

5. Underwriting - If a health plan receives PHI for the purpose of underwriting, 
premium rating, or other activities relating to the creation, renewal, or 
replacement of a contract of health insurance or health benefits, and if such health 
insurance or health benefits are not placed with the health plan, such health plan 
may not use or disclose such PHI for any other purpose, except as required by 
law. 

6. Verification Requirements 

a. General - Prior to any permitted disclosure, a Covered Entity must: 
i. Except with respect to uses and disclosures requiring an 

opportunity for the individual to agree or object, verify the identity 
of a person requesting PHI and the authority of the person to have 
access to PHI, if the identity or authority are not known to the 
Covered Entity; and 

ii. Obtain any documentation, statements, or representations, from the 

39 



person requesting PHI when such documentation, statement or 
representation is a condition of disclosure. 

b. Conditions - If disclosure is conditioned on particular documentation, 
statements, or representations from the person requesting PHI, a Covered 
Entity may rely, if such reliance is reasonable, on documentation, 
statements or representations that on their face meet the applicable 
requirements. 

c. Identity of Public Officials - A Covered Entity may rely, if such reliance is 
reasonable, on any of the following to verify identity when the disclosure 
of PHI is to a public official or a person acting on behalf of the public 
official: 
i. If the request is made in person, presentation of an agency badge, 

credentials or other proof of government status; 
ii. If the request is in writing, the request is on appropriate 

government letterhead; or 
iii. If the disclosure is to a person acting on behalf of the public 

official, a written statement on appropriate government letterhead 
that the person is acting under the government’s authority or other 
evidence or documentation of agency that establishes that the 
person is acting on behalf of the public official. 

d. Authority of Public Officials - A Covered Entity may rely, if such reliance 
is reasonable, on any of the following to verify authority when the 
disclosure of PHI is to a public official or a person acting on behalf of the 
public official: 
i. A written statement of the legal authority under which the 

information is requested or, if a written statement is impracticable, 
an oral statement of such legal authority; 

ii. If a request is made pursuant to legal process, warrant, subpoena, 
order, or other legal process issued by a grand jury or a judicial or 
administrative tribunal, is presumed to constitute legal authority. 

e. Good Faith - The verification requirements are met if the Covered Entity 
relies on the exercise of professional judgment in making a use or 
disclosure in accordance with the requirements for uses and disclosures 
requiring an opportunity for the individual to agree or object or acts on a 
good faith belief in making a disclosure in accordance with the 
requirements for uses and disclosures for which an authorization or 
opportunity to agree or object is not required. 

H. Notice of Privacy Practices for PHI 

1. General - Except as provided in this section, an individual has a right to 
adequate notice of the uses and disclosures of PHI that may be made by a 

40 



Covered Entity, and of the individual’s rights and the Covered Entity’s 
legal duties with respect to PHI. 

2. Exception for Group Health Plans - An individual in a group health plan 
has a right to notice: 
a. From the group health plan, if, and to the extent that, such an 

individual does not receive health benefits under the group health 
plan through an insurance contract with a health insurance issuer or 
HMO; or 

b. From the health insurance issuer or HMO with respect to the group 
health plan through which such individuals receive their health 
benefits under the group health plan. 

c. A group health plan that provides benefits solely through an 
insurance contract with a health insurance issuer or HMO, and that 
creates or receives PHI in addition to summary information, 
participation information or enrollment information, must maintain 
a notice and provide such notice upon request to any person. The 
provisions of paragraph 4(a) below do not apply to such health 
plans. 

d. A group health plan that provides benefits solely through an 
insurance contract with a health insurance issuer or HMO, and that 
does not create or receive PHI other than summary information, 
participation information or enrollment information, is not required 
to maintain or provide a notice under this section. 

3. Content of Notice - The Covered Entity must provide a notice that is 
written in plain language and that contains the following elements: 
a. Header - “THIS NOTICE DESCRIBES HOW MEDICAL 

INFORMATION ABOUT YOU MAY BE USED AND 
DISCLOSED AND HOW YOU CAN GET ACCESS TO THIS 
INFORMATION. PLEASE REVIEW IT CAREFULLY.” 

b. Uses and Disclosures - The notice must 
contain: 
i. A description, including at least one example, of permitted 

uses and disclosures for each of the following purposes: 
treatment, payment and health care operations. 

ii. A description of each of the other purposes for which use 
or disclosure without the individual’s authorization is 
permitted or required. 

iii. If any use or disclosure described in (A) or (B) is 
prohibited or materially limited by other applicable law, the 
description must reflect the more stringent law. 

iv. The descriptions must be sufficiently detailed to put the 
individual on notice of the permitted and required uses and 
disclosures. 

v. A statement that other uses and disclosures will be made 
only with the individual’s written authorization and that the 

41 



individual may revoke such authorization. 
b. Special Uses and Disclosures - If the 

Covered Entity intends to engage in any of the following activities, 
the description of uses and disclosures must include a separate 
statement, as applicable, that: 
i. The Covered Entity may contact the individual to provide 

appointment reminders or information about treatment or 
services which may be of interest to the individual. 

ii. The Covered Entity may contact the individual to raise 
funds for the Covered Entity; or 

iii. A group health plan, or a health insurance issuer or HMO 
with respect to a group health plan, may disclose PHI to the 
sponsor of the plan. 

b. Individual Rights - The Notice must contain 
a statement of the individual’s rights with respect to PHI and a 
brief description of how the individual may exercise these rights, 
as follows: 
i. The right to request restrictions on certain uses and 

disclosures, and that the Covered Entity is not required to 
agree to a requested restriction; 

ii. The right to receive confidential communications of PHI; 
iii. The right to inspect and copy PHI; 
iv. The right to amend PHI; 
v. The right to receive an accounting of disclosures; and 
vi. The right of an individual, including an individual who has 

agreed to receive the notice electronically, to obtain a paper 
copy of the notice upon request. 

b. Covered Entity’s Duties - The Notice must 
contain: 
i. A statement that the Covered Entity is required by law to 

maintain the privacy of PHI and to provide individuals with 
notice of its legal duties and privacy practices; 

ii. A statement that the Covered Entity is required to abide by 
the terms of the notice currently in effect; and 

iii. To apply a change in a privacy practice described in the 
notice to PHI created or received prior to issuing a revised 
notice , a statement that the Covered Entity reserves the 
right to change the terms of the notice and to make new 
notice provisions effective for all PHI that it maintains. The 
statement must also state how it will provide individuals 
with a revised notice. 

b. Complaints - The notice must contain a 
statement that individuals may complain to the Covered Entity and 
to the Secretary of DHHS if they believe their privacy rights have 
been violated, how to make a complaint with the Covered Entity 
and a statement that the individual will not be retaliated against for 

42 



making a complaint. 
c. Contact - The notice must contain the name 

or title, and telephone number of the person or office to contact for 
further information. 

d. Effective Date - The notice must contain the 
date on which the notice is first in effect, which may not be earlier 
than the date on which the notice is printed or otherwise published. 

e. Revisions - The Covered Entity must 
promptly revise and distribute its notice whenever there is a 
material change to the uses or disclosures, the individual’s rights, 
the Covered Entity’s legal duties, or other privacy practices in the 
notice. Except when required by law, a material change may not be 
implemented prior to the effective date in the notice in which such 
change is reflected. 

4. Provision of Notice - A Covered Entity must make the notice available on 
request to any person and to individuals, as follows: 
a. Health Plans - A health plan must provide notice: 

i. No later than the compliance date for the health plan to 
individuals then covered by the plan; 

ii. Thereafter, at the time of enrollment for new enrollees; and 
iii. Within 60 days of a material revision to the notice to 

individuals then covered by the plan. 
iv. No less frequently than once every three years, the health 

plan must notify individuals then covered by the plan of the 
availability of the notice and how to obtain the notice. 

v. The health plan satisfies the notice requirements of this 
subsection if notice is provided to the named insured of a 
policy under which coverage is provided to the named 
insured and one or more dependents. 

vi. If a health plan has more than one notice, it satisfies the 
requirements of this subsection by providing the notice that 
is relevant to the individual or other person requesting the 
notice. 

b. Certain Health Care Providers - A covered health care provider 
that has a direct treatment relationship with an individual must: 
i. Provide the notice no later than the date of first service 

delivery, including service delivered electronically, after 
the compliance date for the provider or, in the case of 
emergency treatment, as soon as practicable after the 
emergency treatment. 

ii. Except in emergency treatment situations, make a good 
faith effort to obtain a written acknowledgment of receipt 
of the notice, and if not obtained, document its good faith 
efforts to obtain such acknowledgment and the reason it 
was not obtained. 

43 



iii. If the provider maintains a physical service delivery site, 
have the notice available at the site for individuals to 
request and take with them and post the notice in a clear 
and prominent location for individuals to be able to read. 

iv. When the notice is revised, make the notice available upon 
request on or after the effective date of the revision and 
promptly comply with subsection (iii) above. 

c. Electronic Notice 
i. A Covered Entity that maintains a web site that provides 

information about the provider’s services or benefits must 
prominently post the notice on the web site and make it 
electronically available through the web site. 

ii. A Covered Entity may provide the notice by e-mail if the 
individual has agreed to electronic notice and such 
agreement has not been withdrawn. If the Covered Entity 
knows the e-mail transmission has failed, it must provide a 
paper copy. 

iii. If the first service delivery is electronic, the provider must 
provide electronic notice automatically and at the same 
time as the individual’s first request for service. The 
requirements regarding obtaining an acknowledgment of 
receipt of the notice apply to electronic notice. 

iv. The individual who receives electronic notice retains the 
right to obtain a paper copy upon request. 

d. Joint Notice by Separate Entities - Covered Entities that participate 
in an OHCA may comply with the notice requirements by a joint 
notice provided that specific requirements are met. 

e. Documentation - A Covered Entity must document compliance 
with the notice requirements by retaining copies of the notices 
issued by the Covered Entity and, if applicable, any written 
acknowledgments of receipt of the notice or documentation of 
good faith efforts to obtain such written acknowledgment. 

I. Rights to Request Privacy Protection for PHI 

1. Right of Individual to Request Restriction of Uses and Disclosures 

a. A Covered Entity must permit an individual to request that the 
Covered Entity restrict uses or disclosures of PHI for treatment, 
payment or health care operations, and disclosures for involvement 
in the individual’s care and notification purposes. 

b. A Covered Entity is not required to agree to a restriction. 
c. A Covered Entity that agrees to a restriction may not use or 

disclose PHI in violation of the restriction except that, where the 
restricted PHI is needed for emergency treatment, the Covered 
Entity may use or disclose such PHI to a health care provider to 

44 



provide such treatment to the individual. If the restricted PHI is 
disclosed for emergency treatment, the Covered Entity must 
request that the health care provider not further use or disclose the 
information. 

d. A restriction agreed to is not effective to prevent uses or 
disclosures permitted or required to the Secretary of DHHS for 
compliance, for facility directories or for which authorization or an 
opportunity to agree or object is not required. 

e. Terminating a Restriction - A Covered Entity may terminate its 
agreement to a restriction if: 
iii. The individual agrees to or requests 

the termination in writing; 
iv. The individual orally agrees to the 

termination and the oral agreement is documented; or 
v. The Covered Entity informs the 

individual it is terminating its agreement to the restriction, 
except that such termination is only effective with regard to 
PHI created or received after it has so informed the 
individual. 

f. A Covered Entity that agrees to a restriction must document that 
restriction. 

2. Confidential Communications Requirements 
a. A covered health care provider must permit individuals to request 

and must accommodate reasonable requests to receive 
communications of PHI by alternative means or at alternative 
locations. 

b. A health plan must permit individuals to request and must 
accommodate reasonable requests to receive communications of 
PHI by alternative means or at alternative locations, if the 
individual clearly states that the disclosure of all or part of that 
information could endanger the individual. 

c. A Covered Entity may require an individual to make a request for a 
confidential communication in writing. 

d. A Covered Entity may condition the provision of a reasonable 
accommodation on information as to how payment, if any and 
when appropriate, will be handled and specification of an 
alternative address or other method of contact. A Covered Entity 
may not require an explanation of the basis for the request as a 
condition. 

J. Access of Individuals to PHI 

1. Access to PHI 
                                   a. Right of Access - Except as otherwise provided in this section, an 

individual has a right of access to inspect and obtain a copy of PHI 

45 



about the individual in a designated record set, for as long as the 
PHI is maintained in the record, except for: 
i. Psychotherapy notes; 
ii. Information compiled in reasonable anticipation of, or for 

use in, a civil, criminal, or administrative action or 
proceeding; and 

iii. PHI that is maintained by a Covered Entity that is subject 
to the Clinical Laboratory Improvements Amendments of 
1988, to the extent provision of access would be prohibited 
by law, or is exempt from the CLIA. 

b. Unreviewable Grounds for Denial - A Covered Entity may deny an 
individual access without providing the individual an opportunity 
to review, in the following circumstances: 
i. The PHI is excepted from the right of access by paragraph 

(a) above; 
ii. A Covered Entity that is a correctional institution or a 

covered health care provider acting under the direction of a 
correctional institution may deny an inmate’s request to 
obtain a copy of PHI, if obtaining such copy would 
jeopardize the health, safety, custody or rehabilitation of 
the inmate or others. 

iii. Access to PHI created or obtained by a health care provider 
in the course of research that includes treatment may be 
temporarily suspended while the research is in progress, 
provided the individual has agreed to the denial of access 
when consenting to participate and the health care provider 
has informed the individual that access will be reinstated 
upon completion of the research. 

iv. An individual’s access to PHI in records subject to the 
Privacy Act may be denied if the denial of access under the 
Privacy Act would meet the requirements of that law. 

v. An individual’s access may be denied if the PHI was 
obtained from someone other than a health care provider 
under a promise of confidentiality and access would likely 
reveal the source of the information. 

c. Reviewable Grounds for Denial - A Covered Entity may deny an 
individual access, provided the individual is given a right to have 
the denial reviewed, in the following circumstances: 
i. A licensed health care professional has determined that the 

access requested is likely to endanger the life or physical 
safety of the individual or another person; 

ii. The PHI makes reference to another person, (other than a 
health care provider) and a licensed health care professional 
has determined that the access requested is likely to cause 
substantial harm to the other person; or 

iii. The request for access is made by the individual’s personal 

46 



representative and a licensed health care professional has 
determined that the provision of access to the personal 
representative is likely to cause substantial harm to the 
individual or another person. 

d. Review of a Denial of Access - If access is denied under paragraph 
(c), the individual has the right to have the denial reviewed by a 
licensed health care professional who is designated by the Covered 
Entity as a reviewing official and who did not participate in the 
original decision to deny. The Covered Entity must provide or 
deny access in accordance with the decision of the reviewing 
official. 

2. Requests for Access and Timely Action 
a. Requests for Access - The Covered Entity must permit an 

individual to request access to inspect or obtain a copy of PHI 
about the individual in a designated record set. The Covered Entity 
may require individuals to make requests for access in writing, 
provided it informs individuals of such a requirement. 

b. Timely Action by the Covered Entity 
i. Except as provided in subsection (ii) below, the Covered 

Entity must act on a request for access no later than 30 days 
after receipt of the request by either informing the 
individual of the acceptance of the request and providing 
the access requested or providing a written denial of the 
request. 

ii. If the request is for PHI that is not maintained or accessible 
to the Covered Entity on-site, the Covered Entity must take 
an action required under subsection (i) no later than 60 days 
from the receipt of the request. 

iii. If the Covered Entity is unable to take action within the 
time required, the Covered Entity may extend the time for 
such actions by no more than 30 days, provided that it 
provides a written statement to the individual within the 
original time limit stating the reasons for the delay and the 
date by which it will complete its action, and the Covered 
Entity may have only one such extension. 

3.        Provision of Access - If the Covered Entity provides an individual with 
access to PHI, the Covered Entity must comply with the following requirements: 

a. Providing the Access Requested - The Covered Entity must 
provide the access requested by individuals, including inspection 
or obtaining a copy, or both, of the PHI about the individual in a 
designated record set. If the same PHI is maintained in more than 
one record set or location, the Covered Entity need only produce 
the PHI once in response to a request. 

b. Form of Access Requested 
i. The Covered Entity must provide the access in the form or 

47 



format requested by the individual, if readily producible, 
or, if not, in a readable hard copy or other format as agreed 
to by the Covered Entity and the individual. 

ii. The Covered Entity may provide a summary of the PHI in 
lieu of providing access or may provide an explanation of 
the PHI requested, if the individual agrees in advance to 
such a summary or explanation and the individual agrees in 
advance to any fees imposed for such summary or 
explanation. 

c. Time and Manner of Access - The Covered Entity must provide 
access in a timely manner, including arranging for a convenient 
time and place for the individual to inspect or obtain a copy of the 
PHI or mailing a copy at the individual’s request. The Covered 
Entity may discuss the aspects of the request to facilitate timely 
access. 

d. Fees - If the individual requests a copy of the PHI or agrees to a 
summary or explanation, the Covered Entity may impose a 
reasonable, cost-based fee, provided the fee includes only the cost 
of: 
i. Copying, including the cost of supplies and labor; 
ii. Postage, when the individual has requested the copy be 

mailed; and 
iii. Preparing an explanation or summary of the PHI, if agreed 

to by the individual. 

4. Denial of Access - If a Covered Entity denies access, in whole or in part, 
to PHI, the Covered Entity must comply with the following requirements: 
a. Making Information Accessible - The Covered Entity must, to the 

extent possible, give the individual access to any other PHI 
requested, after excluding the PHI as to which the Covered Entity 
has a ground to deny access. 

                                   b. Denial - The Covered Entity must provide a timely, written denial 
to the individual. The denial must be in plain language and contain: 
i. The basis for the denial; 
ii. If applicable, a statement of the review rights, including a 

description of how to exercise such review rights: and 
iii. A description of how the individual may complain to the 

Covered Entity or to the Secretary of DHHS. The 
description must include the name, or title, and phone 
number of the designated contact person or office. 

c. Other Responsibility - If the Covered Entity does not maintain the 
PHI requested, and the Covered Entity knows where the PHI is 
maintained, the Covered Entity must inform the individual where 
to direct the request for access. 

d. Review of Denial Requested - If the individual has requested a 
review of the denial, the Covered Entity must designate a licensed 

48 



health care professional, who did not participate in the original 
decision to deny, to review the decision to deny and must promptly 
refer the request for review to such designated reviewing official. 
The designated reviewing official must determine within a 
reasonable time whether or not to deny access. The Covered Entity 
must promptly provide written notice to the individual of the 
decision of the designated reviewing official and provide or deny 
access in accordance with that decision. 

5. Documentation - A Covered Entity must document the following and 
retain the documentation as required by the regulations: 
a. The designated record sets that are subject to access by individuals; 

and 
b. The titles of persons or offices responsible for receiving and 

processing requests for access by individuals. 

K. Amendment of PHI 

1. Right to Amend 
a. Right to Amend - An individual has the right to have a Covered 

Entity amend PHI or a record about an individual in a designated 
record set for as long as the PHI is maintained in the designated 
record set. 

b. Denial of Amendment - A Covered Entity may deny a individual’s 
request for amendment if it determines that the PHI or record that 
is the subject of the request: 
i. Was not created by the Covered Entity, unless the 

individual provides a reasonable basis to believe the 
originator of the PHI is no longer available to act on the 
requested amendment; 

ii. Is not part of the designated record set; 
iii. Would not be available for inspection under the right to 

request access; or 
iv. Is accurate and complete. 

2. Requests for Amendment and Timely Action 
a. Request for Amendment - The Covered Entity must permit an 

individual to request that the Covered Entity amend the PHI 
maintained in the designated record set. The Covered Entity may 
require that such requests be in writing and provide a reason to 
support the requested amendment, provided it informs individuals 
of such requirements in advance. 

b. Timely Action by the Covered Entity - The Covered Entity must 
act on a request for amendment no later than 60 days after receipt 
of the request, as follows: 
i. If it grants the request, in whole or in part, it must take the 

actions required by section (3) below. 
ii. If it denies the requested amendment, in whole or in part, it 

49 



must provide a written denial. 
iii. If it is unable to act within the time required, the Covered 

Entity may extend the time for such action by no more than 
30 days, provided that it provides a written statement to the 
individual within the original time limit stating the reasons 
for the delay and the date by which it will complete its 
action, and the Covered Entity may have only one such 
extension. 

3. Accepting the Amendment - If the Covered Entity accepts the requested 
amendment, in whole or in part, the Covered Entity must comply with the 
following requirements: 
a. Making the Amendment - The Covered Entity must make the 

appropriate amendment to the PHI or record by, at a minimum, 
identifying the records affected by the amendment and appending 
or otherwise linking to the amendment. 

b. Informing the Individual - The Covered Entity must timely inform 
the individual that the amendment is accepted and obtain the 
individual’s identification of and agreement to have the Covered 
Entity notify the relevant persons with which the amendment needs 
to be shared. 

c. Informing Others - The Covered Entity must make reasonable 
efforts to inform and provide the amendment within a reasonable 
time to: 
i. Persons identified by the individual as having received the 

PHI and needing the amendment; and 
ii. Persons, including business associates, that the Covered 

Entity knows have the PHI that is the subject of the 
amendment and that may have relied, or could foreseeably 
rely, on such information to the detriment of the individual. 

4. Denying the Amendment If the Covered Entity denies the requested 
amendment, in whole or in part, the Covered Entity must comply with the 
following requirements. 
a. Denial - The Covered Entity must provide the individual with a 

timely, written denial. The denial must use plain language and 
contain: 
i. The basis for the denial; 
ii. The individual’s right to submit a written statement 

disagreeing with the denial and how the individual may file 
such a statement; 

iii. A statement that, if the individual does not submit a 
statement of disagreement, the individual may request the 
Covered Entity provide the individual’s request for 
amendment and the denial with any future disclosures of 
the PHI; and 

iv. A description of how the individual may complain to the 

50 



Covered Entity or to the Secretary of DHHS. The 
description must include the name, or title, and phone 
number of the designated contact person or office. 

b. Statement of Disagreement - The Covered Entity must permit the 
individual to submit a written statement disagreeing with the denial 
of all or part of the amendment and the basis of such disagreement. 
The Covered Entity may reasonably limit the length of a statement 
of disagreement. 

c. Rebuttal Statement - The Covered Entity may prepare a written 
rebuttal to the statement of disagreement. Whenever a rebuttal is 
prepared, a copy must be provided to the individual. 

d. Recordkeeping - The Covered Entity must, as appropriate, identify 
the record of PHI that is the subject of the disputed amendment and 
append or otherwise link the request, the denial, the statement of 
disagreement and the rebuttal to the designated record set. 

e.         Future Disclosures 
i. If a statement of disagreement has been submitted, the 

Covered Entity must include the information appended to 
the record, or an accurate summary of such information, 
with any subsequent disclosure of the PHI to which the 
disagreement relates. 

ii. If the individual has not submitted a statement of 
disagreement, the Covered Entity must include the request 
for amendment and the denial, or an accurate summary of 
such information, with any subsequent disclosure of the 
PHI only if the individual has requested such action. 

iii. When a subsequent disclosure is made using a standard 
transaction that does not permit the additional material to 
be included with the disclosure, the Covered Entity may 
separately transmit the material required to be sent, to the 
recipient of the standard transaction. 

5. Actions on Notices of Amendment - A Covered Entity that is informed by 
another Covered Entity of an amendment to an individual’s PHI, must 
amend the PHI in designated record sets. 

6. Documentation - A Covered Entity must document the titles of the persons 
or offices responsible for receiving and processing requests for 
amendments by individuals and retain the documentation as required by 
the regulations. 

L. Accounting of Disclosures of PHI 

1. Right to an Accounting of Disclosures of PHI 
a. Right to an Accounting - An individual has right to receive an 

accounting of disclosures of PHI made by a Covered Entity in the 
six years prior to the date on which the accounting is requested, 
except for disclosures: 

51 



i. To carry out treatment, payment and health care operations; 
ii. To individuals of PHI about them; 
iii. Incident to a use or disclosure otherwise permitted or 

required; 
iv. Pursuant to an authorization; 
v. For the facility’s directory or to persons involved in the 

individual’s care or other notification purposes; 
vi. For national security or intelligence purposes; 
vii. To correctional institutions or law enforcement officials in 

custodial situations; 
viii. As part of a limited data set; or 
ix. That occurred prior to the compliance date for the Covered 

Entity. 
b. Suspension of Right to an Accounting - The Covered Entity must 

suspend an individual’s right to receive an accounting of 
disclosures to a health oversight agency or law enforcement 
official for the time specified by such agency or official, if such 
agency or official provides a written statement that such an 
accounting would be reasonably likely to impede the agency’s 
activities and specifying the time for which such a suspension is 
required. 
i. If the agency or official statement is made orally, the 

Covered Entity must: 
A. Document the statement, including the identity of 

the agency or official making the statement; 
B. Temporarily suspend the individual’s right to an 

accounting of disclosures; and 
C. Limit the temporary suspension no longer than 30 

days from the date of the oral statement, unless a 
written statement is submitted during that time. 

c. Time Period - An individual may request an accounting of 
disclosures for a period of time less than six years from the date of 
the request. 

2. Content of the Accounting - The Covered Entity must provide the 
individual with a written accounting that meets the following 
requirements: 
a. Except as otherwise provided in section (1) above, the accounting 

must include disclosures of PHI that occurred during the six years 
(or a shorter period of time at the request of the individual) prior to 
the date of the request, including disclosures to or by business 
associates of the Covered Entity. 

b. Except as otherwise provided by paragraphs (c) and (d) below, the 
accounting must include for each disclosure: 
i. The date of the disclosure; 
ii. The name of the entity or person who received the PHI and, 

if known, the address of such entity or person; 

52 



iii. A brief description of the PHI disclosed; and 
iv. A brief statement of the purpose of the disclosure that 

reasonably informs the individual of the basis for the 
disclosure or a copy of the written request for a disclosure, 
if any. 

c. If, during the period covered by an accounting, the Covered Entity 
has made multiple disclosures of PHI to the same person or entity 
for a single purpose, the accounting may, with respect to such 
multiple disclosures, provide: 
i. The information required by paragraph (b) above for the 

first disclosure during the accounting period; 
ii. The frequency, periodicity, or number of the disclosures 

made during the accounting period; and 
iii. The date of the last disclosure during the accounting period. 

d. If, during the period covered by the accounting, the Covered Entity 
has made disclosures of PHI for a particular research purpose for 
50 or more individuals, the accounting may, with respect to such 
disclosures for which PHI of the individual may have been 
included, provide: 
i. The name of the protocol or other research activity; 
ii. A description in plain language of the research protocol or 

activity, including the purpose and criteria for selecting 
particular records; 

iii. A brief description of the type of PHI disclosed; 
iv. The date or period of time during which such disclosures 

occurred, or may have occurred, including the date of the 
last such disclosure during the accounting period; 

v. The name, address and telephone number of the entity that 
sponsored the research and of the researcher to whom the 
PHI was disclosed; and 

vi. A statement that the PHI may or may not have been 
disclosed for a particular protocol or other research activity. 

If the Covered Entity provides an accounting for research 
disclosures in accordance with this section, and if it is reasonably 
likely that the PHI of the individual was disclosed for such 
research, the Covered Entity shall, at the request of the individual, 
assist in contacting the entity that sponsored the research and the 
researcher. 

3. Provision of the Accounting 
a. The Covered Entity must act on an individual’s request for an 

accounting, no later than 60 days after receipt of such a request, as 
follows: 
i. The Covered Entity must provide the accounting requested: 

or 
ii. If the Covered Entity is unable to provide the accounting 

within the time required, the Covered Entity may extend 

53 



the time for such action by no more than 30 days, provided 
that it provides a written statement to the individual within 
the original time limit stating the reasons for the delay and 
the date by which it will provide the accounting, and the 
Covered Entity may have only one such extension. 

b. The Covered Entity must provide the first accounting to an 
individual in any 12 month period without charge. The Covered 
Entity may impose a reasonable, cost-based fee for each 
subsequent request for an accounting by the same individual within 
the 12 month period, provided that the Covered Entity informs the 
individual in advance of the fee and provides the opportunity to 
withdraw or modify the request in order to avoid or reduce the fee. 

4. Documentation - A Covered Entity must document the following and 
retain the documentation as required by the regulations: 
a. The information required to be included in an accounting for 

disclosures of PHI that are subject to an accounting; 
b. The written accounting that is provided to an individual; and 
c. The titles of the persons or offices responsible for receiving and 

processing requests for an accounting by individuals. 

M. Administrative Requirements 

1. Personnel Designations 
a. A Covered Entity must designate a privacy official who is 

responsible for the development and implementation of policies 
and procedures of the entity and a contact person or office who is 
responsible for receiving complaints and who is able to provide 
further information about matters covered in the notice provided to 
individuals. 

b. A Covered Entity must document such personnel designations as 
required by subsection (10) of this section. 

2. Training 
                                   a. A Covered Entity must train all members of its workforce on the 

policies and procedures with respect to PHI, as necessary and 
appropriate for the members of the workforce to carry out their 
function within the Covered Entity. 

b. A Covered Entity must provide training as follows: 
i. To each member of its workforce by no later than the 

compliance date; 
ii. Thereafter, to each new member of the workforce within a 

reasonable period of time after the person joins the 
workforce; and to each member of its workforce whose 
functions are affected by a material change in the policies 
or procedures, within a reasonable period of time after the 
change becomes effective. 

iii. A Covered Entity must document that the required training 

54 



has been provided as required by subsection (10) of this 
section. 

3. Safeguards 
a. A Covered Entity must have in place appropriate administrative, 

technical and physical safeguards to protect the privacy of PHI. 
b. A Covered Entity must reasonably safeguard PHI from any 

intentional or unintentional use or disclosure that is in violation of 
the standards, implementation specifications or other requirements 
of the regulations. 

c. A Covered Entity must reasonably safeguard PHI to limit 
incidental uses or disclosures made pursuant to an otherwise 
permitted or required use or disclosure. 

4. Complaints to the Covered Entity 
a. A Covered Entity must provide a process for individuals to make 

complaints concerning its policies and procedures or its 
compliance with such policies and procedures or the requirements 
of these regulations. 

b. A Covered Entity must document all complaints received and their 
disposition, if any. 

5. Sanctions 
a. A Covered Entity must have and apply appropriate sanctions 

against members of its workforce who fail to comply with the 
policies and procedures or the requirements of the regulations. This 
standard does not apply to members of the workforce who are 
whistleblowers, victims of crime or who have filed a complaint, 
participated in an investigation or opposed an unlawful act or 
practice. 

b. A Covered Entity must document any sanctions that are applied. 
6. Mitigation - A Covered Entity must mitigate, to the extent practicable, any 

harmful effect that is known to the Covered Entity of a use or disclosure of 
PHI in violation of its policies and procedures or the requirements of these 
regulations by the Covered Entity or its business associate. 

7. Refraining from Intimidation or Retaliatory Acts - A Covered Entity may 
not intimidate, threaten, coerce, discriminate against, or take retaliatory 
action against: 
a. Any individual for the exercise by the individual of any right 

under, or for participation by the individual in any process 
established under the regulations, including the filing of a 
complaint. 

b. Any individual or other person: 
i. Filing a complaint with the Secretary of DHHS; 
ii. Testifying, assisting, or participating in an investigation, 

compliance review or hearing; or 
iii. Opposing any act or practice made unlawful by the 

regulations, provided the person has a good faith belief that 
the practice opposed is unlawful, and the manner of the 

55 



opposition is reasonable and does not involve disclosure of 
PHI in violation of the regulations. 

8. Waiver of Rights - A Covered Entity may not require individuals to waive 
their rights to file complaints or other rights as a condition of the provision 
of treatment, payment, enrollment in a health plan, or eligibility for 
benefits. 

9. Policies and Procedures 
a. General - A Covered Entity must implement policies and 

procedures with respect to PHI that are designed to comply with 
the standards and requirements of the regulations. The policies and 
procedures must be reasonably designed, considering the size and 
activities related to PHI of the Covered Entity, to ensure 
compliance. 

b. Changes to Policies and Procedures 
                                               i. A Covered Entity must change its policies and procedures 

as necessary and appropriate to comply with changes in the 
law and regulations. 

ii. When a Covered Entity changes a privacy practice that is 
stated in the notice, and makes corresponding changes to its 
policies and procedures, it may make the changes effective 
for PHI created or received prior to the effective date of the 
notice revision if it has included in the notice a statement 
reserving its right to make such a change in its privacy 
practices; or 

iii. A Covered Entity may make any other changes to policies 
and procedures at any time, provided that the changes are 
documented and implemented in accordance with 
subsection (e) below. 

c. Changes in Law - Whenever there is a change in law that 
necessitates a change to its policies or procedures, it must promptly 
document and implement the revised policy or procedure. If the 
change in law materially affects its notice, the Covered Entity must 
promptly make the appropriate revisions to the notice. Nothing in 
this paragraph may be used to excuse a failure to comply with the 
law. 

d. Changes to Privacy Practices Stated in the Notice 
i. To implement a change in its policies and procedures to 

reflect a change in a privacy practice that is stated in its 
notice, a Covered Entity must: 
A. Ensure that the policy or procedure, as revised to 

reflect a change in a privacy practice that is stated in 
its notice, complies with the regulations; 

B. Document the policy or procedure, as revised, as 
required by subsection 10; and 

C. Revise the notice as required to state the changed 
practice and make the revised notice available as 

56 



required. The Covered Entity may not implement a 
change to a policy or procedure prior to the 
effective date of the revised notice. 

ii. If a Covered Entity has not reserved its right to change a 
privacy practice that is stated in the notice, the Covered 
Entity is bound by the privacy practices as stated in the 
notice with respect to PHI created or received while such 
notice is in effect. A Covered Entity may change a privacy 
practice that is stated in the notice, and the related policies 
and procedures, without having reserved the right to do so, 
provided that: 
A. Such change meets the implementation 

specifications in subsection (d)(i)(A)-(C) above; 
and 

B. Such change is effective only with respect to PHI 
created or received after the effective date of the 
notice. 

e. Changes to Other Policies and Procedures - A Covered Entity may 
change, at any time, a policy or procedure that does not materially 
affect the content of the notice, provided that: 
i. The policy or procedure, as revised, complies with the 

standards, requirements, and implementation specifications 
of the regulations; and 

ii. Prior to the effective date of the change, the policy or 
procedure, as revised, is documented as required by 
subsection (10) below. 

10. Documentation - A Covered Entity must: 
a. Maintain the policies and procedures provided for in subsection (9) 

above in written or electronic form; 
b. If a communication is required by the regulations to be in writing, 

maintain such writing, or an electronic copy, as documentation; 
and 

c. If an action, activity, or designation is required by the regulations 
to be documented, maintain a written or electronic record of such 
action, activity or designation; and 

d. Retain the documentation required by this paragraph for six years 
from the date of its creation or the date when it was last in effect, 
whichever is later. 

11. Group Health Plans 
                                   a. A group health plan is not subject to the standards or 

implementation specifications in subsections (1) through (6) and 
(9) of this section, to the extent that: 
i. The group health plan provides benefits solely through an 

insurance contract with a health insurance issuer or an 
HMO: and 

57 



ii. The group health plan does not create or receive PHI, 
except for: 
A. Summary health information; or 
B. Information on whether the individual is 

participating in the group health plan, or is enrolled 
in or has disenrolled from a health insurance issuer 
or HMO offered by the plan. 

b. A group health plan described in paragraph (11)(a) above is subject 
to the standard and implementation specification in paragraph (10) 
of this subsection only with respect to plan documents amended in 
accordance with the regulations. 

N. Transition Provisions 

1. Effect of Prior Authorizations - Notwithstanding sections (D) and (F) of 
this Article (V), a Covered Entity may use or disclose PHI, consistent with 
subsections (2) and (3) below, pursuant to an authorization or other 
express legal permission obtained from an individual permitting the use or 
disclosure of PHI, informed consent of the individual to participate in 
research, or a waiver of informed consent by an IRB. 

2. Effect of Prior Authorizations for Other than Research Purposes -
Notwithstanding section (D) of this Article (V), a Covered Entity may use 
or disclose PHI that it created or received prior to the applicable 
compliance date of the privacy regulations pursuant to an authorization or 
other express legal permission obtained from an individual prior to the 
applicable compliance date of the privacy regulations, provided that the 
authorization or other express legal permission specifically permits such 
use or disclosure and there is no agreed-to restriction. 

3. Effect of Prior Permission for Research - Notwithstanding sections (D) 
and (F)(9) of this Article (V), a Covered Entity may, to the extent allowed 
by one of the following permissions, use or disclose, for research, PHI that 
it created or received either before or after the applicable compliance date 
of the privacy regulations, provided that there is no agreed-to restriction, 
and the Covered Entity has obtained, prior to the applicable compliance 
date, either: 

a. An authorization or other express legal permission from an 
individual to use or disclose PHI for the research; 

b. The informed consent of the individual to participate in the 
research; or 

c. A waiver by an IRB of informed consent in accordance with 
federal regulations, provided that a Covered Entity must obtain the 
authorization in accordance with section (D) of this Article if, after 
the compliance date, informed consent is sought from an individual 
participating in the research. 

4. Effect of Prior Contracts or Arrangements with Business Associates -

58 



Notwithstanding any other part of the privacy regulations, a Covered 
Entity, other than a small health plan, may disclose PHI to a business 
associate and may allow a business associate to create, receive or use PHI 
on its behalf pursuant to a written contract or other written arrangement 
with such business associate that does not comply with the requirements 
of the privacy regulations pertaining to business associates consistent with 
the requirements, and only for such time, set forth in subsection (5) below. 

5. Deemed Compliance 
a. Qualification - Notwithstanding any other part of the privacy 

regulations, a Covered Entity, other than a small health plan, is 
deemed to be in compliance with the documentation and contract 
requirements pertaining to business associates, with respect to a 
particular business associate relationship, for the time period set 
forth in (b) below, if: 
i. Prior to October 15, 2002, such Covered Entity has entered 

into and is operating pursuant to a written contract or 
arrangement with a business associate for such business 
associate to perform functions or activities or provide 
services that make the entity a business associate; and 

ii. The contract or other arrangement is not renewed or 
modified from October 15, 2002 until the compliance date. 

b. Limited Deemed Compliance Period - A prior contract or other 
arrangement that meets the qualification requirements in this 
subsection (5), shall be deemed compliant until the earlier of: 
i. The date such contract or other arrangement is renewed or 

modified on or after the compliance date; or 
ii. April 14, 2004. 

c. Covered Entity Responsibilities - Nothing in this section shall alter 
the requirements of a Covered Entity to comply with the 
compliance and enforcement regulations of HIPAA, and the 
requirements pertaining to access to PHI, accounting of disclosures 
of PHI, amendment of PHI and mitigation of harmful effects with 
respect to PHI held by a business associate. 

The Compliance Date for the Privacy Standards is April 14, 2003. 

VI. Security Requirements 

           The Security Requirements apply to Health Plans, and Health Care Clearinghouses or 
Health Care Providers who either 1) process any electronic transmission between entities or 2) 
electronically maintain any health information used in an electronic transmission that has been 
sent or received between health care entities. Hybrid Entity concept does not apply. Entire 
institution is covered entity if one component is covered. FERPA exception does not apply. 

A. Administrative procedures - documented, formal practices to manage the 
execution and selection of security measures to protect data and to manage the 
conduct of personnel to protect data, i.e. audits, training, disaster recovery. 

59 



B. Physical safeguards - protection of physical computer systems, buildings 
and equipment from fire, natural and environmental hazards and intrusion. Must 
appoint a security officer. 

B. Technical security services - processes put in place to protect information 
and control individual access to information such as passwords, encryption, entity 
authentication. 

B. Technical security mechanisms - processes put in place to guard against 
unauthorized access to data transmitted over a network, such as message 
authentication, encryption, alarms, event reporting. 

B. Standards for electronic signature. 

The Security regulations are not yet finalized. When final regulations are issued, they will 
go into effect two years from the date of issuance. 

VII National Identifiers 

HIPAA requires the Secretary of DHHS to adopt standards providing for a standard 
unique identifier for each individual, employer, health plan, and health care provider for use in 
the health care system. 

So far, only the regulations regarding the National Employer Identifiers have been 
finalized, with an effective date of July 30, 2004. National Identifiers for providers, individuals 
and payors have not yet been finalized. 

VIII Preemption of State Law 

In general, HIPAA preempts provisions of state law which are contrary to HIPAA. This 
general rule does not apply if one of the following conditions is met: 

A. The Secretary of DHHS has made a determination that the state law should not be 
preempted. 

B. The state law relates to the privacy of health information and is more stringent 
than HIPAA. 

C. The state law provides for the reporting of disease or injury, child abuse, birth, 
death, or for public health surveillance, investigation or intervention. 

D. The state law requires health plans to report or allow access to information for 
audit or licensing purposes. 

IX Compliance and Enforcement 

60 



A person who believes a covered entity is not in compliance with HIPAA may file a 
complaint with the Secretary of DHHS. The Secretary may investigate complaints and may also 
conduct compliance reviews to determine compliance. A covered entity must: 

D. Provide records and compliance reports as required by the Secretary. 
E. Cooperate with complaint investigations and compliance reviews. 
F. Permit access to information by the Secretary. 

X Penalties 

A. General 

In general, the Secretary shall impose on anyone who violates a provision of 
HIPAA a penalty of not more than $100 for each such violation, except that the 
total amount imposed on a person for violations of an identical requirement 
during a calendar year may not exceed $25,000. There are limitations on this 
penalty when the failure to comply is due to reasonable cause and is cured within 
30 days, when the noncompliance was not known and could not have reasonably 
been known by the person, and when other penalties apply. 

B. Wrongful Disclosure 

A person who knowingly and in violation of HIPAA 

3. Uses or causes to be used a unique health identifier; 
4. Obtains individually identifiable health information relating to an 

individual; or 
5. Discloses individually identifiable health information to another 

person, 

shall be punished as follows: 

1. Be fined not more than $50,000 imprisoned not more than 
one year, or both; 

2. If the offense is committed under false pretenses, be fined 
not more than $100,000, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both; and 

3. If the offense is committed with the intent to sell, transfer, 
or use individually identifiable health information for commercial 
advantage, personal gain, or malicious harm, be fined not more than 
$250,000, imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both. 

61